Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of
the West

Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West
Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West
By Gregory Maguire
Prologue
On the Yellow Brick Road
A mile above Oz, the Witch balanced on the wind’s forward edge, as if she were a green fleck
of the land itself, flung up and sent wheeling away by the turbulent air. ‘White and purple summer
thunderheads mounded around her. Below, the Yellow Brick Road looped back on itself, like a
relaxed noose. Though winter storms and the crowbars of agitators had torn up the road, still it led,
relentlessly, to the Emerald City. The Witch could see the companions trudging along, maneuvering
around the buckled sections, skirting trenches, skipping when the way was clear. They seemed
oblivious of their fate. But it was not up to the Witch to enlighten them.
She used the broom as a sort of balustrade, stepping down from the sky like one of her flying
monkeys. She finished up on the topmost bough of a black wiliow tree. Beneath, hidden by the
fronds, her prey had paused to take their rest. The Witch tucked her broom under her arm. Crablike
and quiet, she scuttled down a little at a time, until she was a mere twenty feet above them. Wind
moved the dangling tendrils of the tree. The Witch stared and listened.
There were four of them. She could see a huge Cat of some sort-a Lion, was it?-and a shiny
woodman. The Tin Woodman was picking flits out of the Lion’s mane, and the Lion was muttering
and squirming from the aggravation. An animated Scarecrow lolled nearby, blowing dandelion heads
into the wind. The girl was out of sight behind shifting curtains of the willow.
“Of course, to hear them tell it, it is the surviving sister who is the crazy one,” said the Lion.
“What a Witch. Psychologically warped; possessed by demons. Insane. Not a pretty picture.”
“She was castrated at birth,” replied the Tin Woodman calmly. “She was born hermaphroditic,
or maybe entirely male.”
“Oh you, you see castration everywhere you look,” said the Lion.
“I’m only repeating what folks say,” said the Tin Woodman.
“Everyone is entitled to an opinion,” said the Lion airily. “She was deprived of a mother’s
love, is how I’ve heard it. She was an abused child. She was addicted to medicine for her skin
condition.”
“She has been unlucky in love,” said the Tin Woodman, “like the rest of us.” The Tin Woodman
paused and placed his hand on the center of his chest, as if in grief.
“She’s a woman who prefers the company of other women,” said the Scarecrow, sitting up.
“She’s the spurned lover of a married man.”
“She is a married man.”
The Witch was so stunned that she nearly lost her grip on the branch. The last thing she ever
cared for was gossip. Yet she had been out of touch for so long that she was astonished at the
vigorous opinions of these random nobodies.
“She’s a despot. A dangerous tyrant,” said the Lion with conviction.
The Tin Woodman pulled harder than was necessary on a lock of mane. “Everything’s
dangerous to you, you craven thing. I hear she’s a champion of home rule for the so-called Winkles.”
“Whoever she is, she must surely be grieving the death of her sister,” said the child, in a somber
voice too rich, too sincere for one so young. The Witch’s skin crawled.

“Don’t go feeling sympathetic now. I certainly can’t.” The Tin Woodman sniffed, a bit
cynically.
“But Dorothy’s right,” said the Scarecrow. “No one is exempt from grief.”
The Witch was deeply irked by their patronizing speculations. She moved around the trunk of
the tree, stretching to catch a glimpse of the child. The wind was picking up, and the Scarecrow
shivered. While the Tin Woodman continued fussing over the Lion’s tresses, he leaned against the
Lion, who held him tenderly. “Storm on the horizon,” said the Scarecrow.
Miles off, thunder echoed. “There-is-a-Witch on the horizon,” said the Tin Woodman, tickling
the Lion. The Lion got spooked and rolled on top of the Scarecrow, whimpering, and the Tin
Woodman collapsed on top of them both.
“Good friends, should we be wary of that storm?” said the girl.
The rising winds moved the curtain of greenery at last, and the Witch caught sight of the girl.
She was sitting with her feet tucked underneath her and her arms wrapped around her knees. She was
not a dainty thing but a good-size farm girl, dressed in blue-and-white checks and a pinafore. In her
lap, a vile little dog cowered and whined.
“The storm makes you skittish. It’s natural after what you’ve been through,” said the Tin
Woodman. “Relax.”
The Witch’s fingers dug into the bark of the tree. She still could not see the girl’s face, just her
strong forearms and the crown of her head where her dark hair was pulled back into pigtails. Was
she to be taken seriously, or was she merely a blow-away dandelion seed, caught on the wrong side
of the wind? If she could see the girl’s face, the Witch felt she might know.
But as the Witch craned outward from the trunk, the girl at the same time twisted her face,
turning away. “That storm is coming closer, and in a hurry.” The feeling in her voice rose as the
wind rose. She had a throaty vehemence, like someone arguing through the threat of impending tears.
“I know storms, I know how they come upon you!”
“We’re safer here,” said the Tin Woodman.
“Certainly we are not,” answered the girl, “because this tree is the highest point around, and if
lightning is to strike, it will strike here.” She clutched her dog. “Didn’t we see a shed farther up the
road? Come, come; Scarecrow, if there’s lightning, you’ll burn the fastest! Come on!”
She was up and running in an ungainly way, and her companions followed in a mounting panic.
As the first hard drops of rain fell, the Witch caught sight, not of the girl’s face, but of the shoes. Her
sister’s shoes. They sparkled even in the darkening afternoon. They sparkled like yellow diamonds,
and embers of blood, and thorny stars.
If she had seen the shoes first, the Witch would never have been able to listen to the girl or her
friends. But the girl’s legs had been tucked beneath her skirt. Now the Witch was reminded of her
need. The shoes should be hers!-hadn’t she endured enough, hadn’t she earned them? The Witch
would fall on the girl from the sky, and wrestle those shoes off her impertinent feet, if only she could.
But the storm from which the companions raced, farther and faster along the Yellow Brick
Road, troubled the Witch more than it did the girl
who had gone through rain and the Scarecrow whom lightning could burn. The Witch could not
venture out in such a vicious, insinuating wetness. Instead, she had to tuck herself between some
exposed roots of the black willow tree, where no water could endanger her, and wait for the storm to
pass.
She would emerge. She always had before. The punishing political climate of Oz had beat her
down, dried her up, tossed her away-like a seedling she had drifted, apparently too desiccated ever
to take root. But surely the curse was on the land of Oz, not on her. Though Oz had given her a
twisted life, hadn’t it also made her capable?

No matter that the companions had hurried away. The Witch could wait. They would meet
again.

Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West

Book 1 - Munchkinlanders
From the crumpled bed the wife said, “I think today’s the day. Look how I’ve gone.”
“Today? That would be like you, perverse and inconvenient,” said her husband, teasing her,
standing at the doorway and looking outward, over the lake, the fields, the forested slopes beyond.
He could just make out the chimneys of Rush Margins, breakfast fires smoking. “The worst possible
moment for my ministry. Naturally.”
The wife yawned. “There’s not a lot of choice involved. From what I hear. Your body gets this
big and it takes over-if you can’t accommodate it, sweetheart, you just get out of its way. It’s on a
track of its own and nothing stops it now.” She pushed herself up, trying to see over the rise of her
belly. “I feel like a hostage to myself. Or to the baby.”
“Exert some self-control.” He came to her side and helped her sit up. “Think of it as a spiritual
exercise. Custody of the senses. Bodily as well as ethical continence.”
“Self-control?” She laughed, inching toward the edge of the bed. “I have no self left. I’m only a
host for the parasite. Where’s my self anyway? Where’d I leave that tired old thing?”
“Think of me.” His tone had changed; he meant this.
“Frex”-she headed him off-“when the volcano’s ready there’s no priest in the world can pray it
quiet.”
“What will my fellow ministers think?”
“They’ll get together and say, ‘Brother Frexspar, did you allow your wife to deliver your first
child when you had a community problem to solve? How inconsiderate of you; it shows a lack of
authority. You’re fired from the position.” She was ribbing him now, for there was no one to fire
him. The nearest bishop was too distant to pay attention to the particulars of a unionist cleric in
the hinterland.
“It’s just such terrible timing.”
“I do think you bear half the blame for the timing,” she said. “I mean, after all, Frex.”
“That’s how the thinking goes, but I wonder.”
“You wonder?” She laughed, her head going far back. The line from her ear to the hollow
below her throat reminded Frex of an elegant silver ladle. Even in morning disarray, with a belly
like a scow, she was majestically good-looking. Her hair had the bright lacquered look of wet fallen
oak leaves in sunlight. He blamed her for being born to privilege and admired her efforts to
overcome it-and all the while he loved her, too.
“You mean you wonder if you’re the father”-she grabbed the bedstead; Frex took hold of her
other arm and hauled her half-upright-“or do you question the fatherliness of men in general?” She
stood, mammoth, an ambulatory island. Moving out the door at a slug’s pace, she laughed at such an
idea. He could hear her laughing from the outhouse even as he began to dress for the day’s battle.
Frex combed his beard and oiled his scalp. He fastened a clasp of bone and rawhide at the nape
of his neck, to keep the hair out of his face, because his expressions today had to be readable from a
distance: There could be no fuzziness to his meaning. He applied some coal dust to darken his
eyebrows, a smear of red wax on his flat cheeks. He shaded his lips. A handsome priest attracted
more penitents than a homely one.
In the kitchen yard Melena floated gently, not with the normal gravity of pregnancy but as if
inflated, a huge balloon trailing its strings through the dirt. She carried a skillet in one hand and a
few eggs and the whiskery tips of autumn chives in the other. She sang to herself, but only in short
phrases. Frex wasn’t meant to hear her.
His sober gown buttoned tight to the collar, his sandals strapped on over leggings, Frex took

from its hiding place-beneath a chest of drawers-the report sent to him from his fellow minister over
in the village of Three Dead Trees. He hid the brown pages within his sash. He had been keeping
them from his wife, afraid that she would want to come along-to see the fun, if it was amusing, or to
suffer the thrill of it if it was terrifying.
As Frex breathed deeply, readying his lungs for a day of oratory, Melena dangled a wooden
spoon in the skillet and stirred the eggs. The tinkle of cowbells sounded across the lake. She did not
listen; or she listened but to something else, to something inside her. It was sound without melodylike dream music, remembered for its effect but not for its harmonic distresses and recoveries. She
imagined it was the child inside her, humming for happiness. She knew he would be a singing child.
Melena heard Frex inside, beginning to extemporize, warming up, calling forth the rolling
phrases of his argument, convincing himself again of his righteousness.
How did that proverb go, the one that Nanny singsonged to her, years ago, in the nursery?
Born in the morning,
Woe without warning;
Afternoon child
Woeful and wild;
Born in the evening,
Woe ends in grieving.
Night baby borning
Same as the morning.
But she remembered this as a joke, fondly. Woe is the natural end of life, yet we go on having
babies.
No, said Nanny, an echo in Melena’s mind (and editorializing as usual): No, no, you pretty little
pampered hussy. We don’t go on having babies, that’s quite apparent. We only have babies when
we’re young enough not to know how grim life turns out. Once we really get the full measure of itwe’re slow learners, we women-we dry up in disgust and sensibly halt production.
But men don’t dry up, Melena objected; they can father to the death.
Ah, we’re slow learners, Nanny countered. But they can’t learn at all.
“Breakfast,” said Melena, spooning eggs onto a wooden plate. Her son would not be as dull as
most men. She would raise him up to defy the onward progress of woe.
“It is a time of crisis for our society,” recited Frex. For a man who condemned worldly
pleasures he ate with elegance. She loved to watch the arabesque of fingers and two forks. She
suspected that beneath his righteous asceticism he possessed a hidden longing for the easy life.
“Every day is a great crisis for our society.” She was being flip, answering him in the terms
men use. Dear thick thing, he didn’t hear the irony in her voice.
“We stand at a crossroads. Idolatry looms. Traditional values in jeopardy. Truth under siege
and virtue abandoned.”
He wasn’t talking to her so much as practicing his tirade against the coming spectacle of
violence and magic. There was a side to Frex that verged on despair; unlike most men, he was able
to channel it to benefit his life’s work. With some difficulty she set herself down on a bench. Whole
choruses were singing wordlessly inside her head! Was this common for every labor and delivery?
She would have liked to ask the nosy local women who would come around this afternoon, growling
shyly at her condition. But she didn’t dare. She couldn’t jettison her pretty accent, which they found
affected-but she could avoid sounding ignorant about these basic matters.
Frex noticed her silence. “You’re not angry I’m leaving you today?”
“Angry?” She raised her eyebrows, as if she had never encountered the concept before.
“History crawls along on the peg legs of small individual lives,” said Frex, “and at the same

time larger eternal forces converge. You can’t attend to both arenas at once.”
“Our child may not have a small life.”
“Now isn’t the time to argue. Do you want to distract me from holy work today? We’re facing
the presence of real evil in Rush Margins. I couldn’t live with myself if I ignored it.” He meant this,
and for such intensity she had fallen in love with him; but she hated him for it too, of course.
“Threats come-they’ll come again.” Her last word on the subject. “Your son will only be born
once, and if this watery upheaval inside is any indication, I think it’s today.”
“There will be other children.”
She turned away so he could not see the rage in her face.
But she couldn’t sustain the fury at him. Perhaps this was her moral failing. (She wasn’t much
given to worrying about moral failings as a rule; having a minister as a husband seemed to stir
enough religious thought for one couple.) She lapsed sullenly into silence. Frex nibbled at his meal.
“It’s the devil,” said Frex, sighing. “The devil is coming.”
“Don’t say a thing like that on a day our child is expected!”
“I mean the temptation in Rush Margins! And you know what I mean, Melena!”
“Words are words, and what’s said is said!” she answered. “I don’t require all your attention,
Frex, but I do need some of it!” She dropped the skillet with a crash on the bench that stood against
the cottage wall.
“Well, and likewise,” he said. “What do you think I’m up against today? How can I convince
my flock to turn away from the razzle-dazzle spectacle of idolatry? I will probably come back
tonight having lost to a smarter attraction. You might achieve a child today. I look forward to
failure.” Still, as he said this he looked proud; to fail in the cause of a high moral concern was
satisfying to him. How could it compare with the flesh, blood, mess, and noise of having a baby?
He stood at last to leave. A wind came up over the lake now, smudging the topmost reaches of
the columns of kitchen smoke. They looked, thought Melena, like funnels of water swirling down
drains in narrowing, focusing spirals.
“Be well, my love,” said Frex, although he had his stern public expression on, from forehead to
toes.
“Yes.” Melena sighed. The child punched her, deep down, and she had to hurry to the outhouse
again. “Be holy, and I’ll be thinking of you-my backbone, my breastplate. And also try not to be
killed.”
“The will of the Unnamed God,” said Frex.
“My will too,” she said, blasphemously.
“Apply your will to that which deserves it,” he answered. Now he was the minister and she the
sinner, an arrangement she did not particularly enjoy.
“Good-bye,” she said, and chose the stink and relief of the outhouse over standing to wave him
out of sight as he strode along the road to Rush Margins.
Frex was more concerned for Melena than she knew. He stopped at the first fisherman’s hut he
saw and spoke with the man at the half-door. Could a woman or two spend the day and if needed the
night with Melena? It would be a kindness. Frex nodded with a wince of gratitude, acknowledging
without words that Melena was not a great favorite in these parts.
Then, before continuing around the end of Illswater and over to Rush Margins, he stopped at a
fallen tree and drew two letters from his sash.
The writer was a distant cousin of Frex’s, also a minister. Weeks earlier the cousin had spent
rime and valuable ink on a description of what was being called the Clock of the Time Dragon. Frex
prepared himself for the day’s holy campaign by rereading about the idol clock.
I write in haste, Brother Frexspar, to catch my impressions before they fade.

The Clock of the Time Dragon is mounted on a wagon and stands as high as a giraffe. It is
nothing more than a tottering, freestanding theatre, punched on all four sides with alcoves and
proscenium arches. On the flat roof is a clockwork dragon, an invention of green painted
leather, silvery claws, ruby jeweled eyes. Its skin is made of hundreds of overlapping discs of
copper, bronze, and iron. Beneath the flexible folds of its scales is an armature controlled by
clockwork. The Time Dragon circles on its pedestal, flexes its narrow leathery wings (they make a
sound like a bellows), and belches out sulfurous balls of flaming orange stink.
Below, featured in the dozens of doorways, windows, and porches, are puppets, marionettes,
figurines. Creatures of folk tale. Caricatures of peasants and royalty alike. Animals and fairies and
saints-our unionist saints, Brother Frexspar, stolen out from underneath us! I get enraged. The figures
move on sprockets. They wheel in and out of doorways. They bend at the waist, they dance and
dawdle and daily with each other.
Who had engendered this Time Dragon, this fake oracle, this propaganda tool for wickedness
that challenged the power of unionism and of the Unnamed God? The clock’s handlers were a dwarf
and some narrow-waisted minions who seemed to have only enough brain capacity among them to
pass a hat. Who else was benefiting besides the dwarf and his beauty boys?
The cousin’s second letter had warned that the clock was making its way next to Rush Margins.
It had told a more specific story.
The entertainment began with a thrum of strings and a rattle of bones. The crowd pushed close,
oohing. Within the lighted window of a stage, we saw a marriage bed, with a puppet wife and
husband. The husband was asleep and the wife sighed. She made a motion with her carved hands to
suggest that her husband was disappointingly small. The audience shrieked with laughter. The puppet
wife went to sleep herself. ‘When she was snoring, the puppet husband sneaked Out of bed.
At this point, up above, the Dragon turned on its base, and pointed its talons into the crowd,
indicating_without a doubt- a humble well digger named Grine, who has been a faithful if inattentive
husband. Then the dragon reared back and stretched two fingers in a come-hither gesture, isolating a
widow named Letta and her snaggle-toothed maiden daughter. The crowd hushed and fell away from
Crine, Letta, and the blushing maid, as if they had suddenly been inflicted with running sores.
The Dragon rested again but draped a wing over another archway, which lit up to reveal the
puppet husband, wandering out in the night. Along came a puppet widow, with sprigged hair
and high color, dragging along a protesting, flinty-toothed daughter. The kissed the puppet
husband, and pulled off his leather trousers. He was equipped with two full sets of male goods, one
in the front and another hanging off the base of his spine. The widow positioned her daughter on the
abbreviated prong in the front, and herself took advantage of the morning arrangement in the rear.
The three puppets bucked and rocked, emitting squeals of glee. When the puppet widow and her
daughter were through, they dismounted and kissed the adulterous puppet husband. Then they kneed
him, simultaneously, fore and aft. He swung on springs and hinges, trying to hold all his wounded
parts.
The audience roared. Crine, the actual well digger, sweated drops as big as grapes. Letta
pretended to guffaw, but her daughter had already disappeared from shame. Before the evening was
out, Crine was set upon by his agitated neighbors and investigated for the grotesque anomaly. Letta
was shunned. Her daughter seems to have vanished entirely. We suspect the worst.
At least Grine wasn t killed. Yet who can say how our souls have been stamped by witnessing
such a cruel drama? All souls are hostages to their human envelopes, but souls must decay and suffer
at much indignity, don’ t you agree?
Sometimes it seemed to Frex that every itinerant witch and toothless gibbering seer in Oz who
could perform even the most transparent of spells had seized on the outback district of Wend

Hardings to scratch out a trade. He knew that folks from Rush Margins were humble. Their lives
were hard and their hopes few. As the drought dragged on, their traditional unionist faith was
eroding. Frex was aware that the Clock of the Time Dragon combined the appeals of ingenuity and
magic-and he would have to call on his deepest reserves of religious conviction to overcome it. If
his congregation should prove vulnerable to the so-called pleasure faith, succumbing to spectacle
and violence-well, what next?
He would prevail. He was their minister. He had pulled their teeth and buried their babies and
blessed their kitchen pots for years now. He had abased himself in their names. He had wandered
with an unkempt
beard and a begging bowl from hamlet to hamlet, leaving poor Melena alone in the minister’s
lodge for weeks at a time. He had sacrificed for them. They couldn’t be swayed by this Time Dragon
creature. They owed him.
He moved on, shoulders squared, jaw set, stomach in a sour uproar. The sky was brown with
flying sand and grit. The wind rushed high over the bills with the sound of a tremulous wail, as if
pushing through some fissure of rock, on a ridge beyond any Frex could see.
It was nearly evening by the time Frex had worked up the courage to enter the ramshackle
hamlet of Rush Margins. He was in a deep sweat. He hit his heels to the ground and pumped his
clenched fists, and called out in a hoarse, carrying tone. “Hist, oh ye of small confidence! Gather
while ye may, for temptation is abroad, to try ye sorely!” The words were archaic, even ridiculous,
but they worked. Here came the sullen fishermen, dragging their empty nets up from the dock. Here
came the subsistence farmers, whose hardscrabble plots had borne little during this dry year. Before
he had even begun, they all looked guilty as sin.
They followed him to the rickety steps of the canoe repair house. Frex knew that everyone
expected this evil clock to arrive at any instant; gossip was as contagious as the plague. He yelled at
them for their thirsty anticipation. “Ye are dull as toddlers reaching their hands to touch the pretty
embers! Ye are as if spawn of dragon womb, ready to suck on teats of fire!” These were time-worn
scriptural imprecations and they fell a little flat tonight; he was tired and not at his best.
“Brother Frexspar,” said Bree, the mayor of Rush Margins, “could you perhaps tone down your
harangue until we get a chance to see what fresh new form temptation might take?”
“You have no mettle to resist new forms,” said Frex, spitting.
“Haven’t you been our able teacher- these several years?” said Bree. “We’ve hardly had such a
good chance to prove ourselves against sin! We’re looking forward to-to the spiritual test of it all.”
The fishermen laughed and jeered, and Frex intensified his glower, but at the sound of
unfamiliar wheels in the stony ruts of the road, they all turned their heads and fell silent. He had lost
their attention before he had gotten started.
The clock was being drawn by four horses and escorted by the dwarf and his cohort of young
thugs. Its broad roof was crowned by the dragon. But what a beast! It looked poised as if ready to
spring, as if indeed invested with life. The skin of the house was decorated in carnival colors,
burnished with gold leaf. The fishermen gaped as it drew near.
Before the dwarf could announce the time of the performance, before the crowd of youths could
draw out their clubs, Frex leaped on the lower step of the thing-a fold-down stage on hinges. “Why
is this thing called a clock? The only clock face it has is flat, dull, and lost in all that distracting
detail. Furthermore, the hands don’t move: Look, see for yourselves! They’re painted to remain at
one minute before midnight! All you’ll see here is mechanics, my friends: I know this for a fact.
You’ll see mechanical cornfields growing, moons waxing and waning, a volcano to spew a soft red
cloth done up with black and red sequins. With all this tiktoky business, why not have a pair of
circulating arms on the clock face? Why not? I ask you, I’m asking you, yes, you, Gawnette, and you,

Stoy, and you, Perippa. Why no real clock here?”
They were not listening, Gawnette and Stoy and Perippa, nor were the others. They were too
busy staring in anticipation.
“The answer, of course, is that the clock isn’t meant to measure earthly time, but the time of the
soul. Redemption and condemnation time. For the soul, each instant is always a minute short of
judgment.
“One minute short of judgment, my friends! If you died in the next sixty seconds, would you
want to spend eternity in the suffocating depths reserved for idolaters?”
“Awful lot of noise in the neighborhood tonight,” said someone in the shadows-and the
spectators laughed. Above Frex-he whirled to see-from a little door had emerged a small, yapping
puppet dog, its hair dark and as tightly curled as Frex’s own. The dog bounced on a spring, and the
pitch of its chatter was annoyingly high. The laughter grew. Evening fell harder, and it was less easy
for Frex to tell who was laughing, who now was shouting for him to move aside so they could see.
He wouldn’t move, so he was bundled unceremoniously from his perch. The dwarf gave a
poetic welcome. “All our lives are activity without meaning; we burrow rat-like into life and we
squirm rat-like through it and rat-like we are flung into our graves at the end. Now and then, why
shouldn’t we
hear a voice of prophecy, or see a miracle play? Beneath the apparent sham and indignity of our
rat-like lives, a humble pattern and meaning still applies! Come nearer, my good people, and watch
what a little extra knowledge augurs for your lives! The Time Dragon sees before and beyond and
within the truth of your sorry span of years here! Look at what it shows you!”
The crowd pushed forward. The moon had risen, its light like the eye of an angry, vengeful god.
“Give over, let me go,” Frex called; it was worse than he had thought. He had never been
manhandled by his own congregation.
The clock unfolded story about a publicly pious man, with lamb’s wool beard and dark curly
locks, who preached simplicity, poverty, and generosity while keeping a hidden coffer of gold and
emeralds-in the double-hinged bosom of a weak-chinned daughter of blue blood society. The
scoundrel was run through with a long iron stake in a most indelicate way and served up to his
hungry flock as Roast Flank of Minister.
“This panders to your basest instincts!” Frex yelled, his arms folded and his face magenta with
fury.
But now that darkness was almost total, someone came up from behind him to silence him. An
arm encircled his neck. He twisted to see which damned parishioner took such liberties, but all the
faces were cloaked by hoods. He was kneed in the groin and doubled over, his face in the dirt. A
foot kicked him square between the buttocks and his bowels released. The rest of the crowd,
however, was not watching. They were howling with mirth at some other entertainment put on by the
Clock Dragon. A sympathetic woman in a widow’s shawl grabbed his arm and led him away-he was
too fouled, too much in pain to straighten up and see who it was. “I’ll put you down in the root
cellar, I will, under a burlap,” crooned the goodwife, “for they’ll be after you tonight with
pitchforks, the way that thing is behaving itself They’ll look for you in your lodge, but they won’t
look in my keeping room.”
“Melena,” he croaked, “they’ll find her-“
“She’ll be seen to,” said his neighbor. “We women can manage that much, I guess!”
In the minister’s lodge, Melena struggled with consciousness as a pair of midwives went in and
out of focus before her. One was a fishwife, the
other a palsied crone; they took turns feeling tier forehead, peeing between her legs, and
stealing glances at the few beautiful trinkets and treasures Melena had managed to bring here from

Coiwen Grounds.
“You chew that paste of pinlobble leaves, duckie, you do that. You’ll be unconscious before
you know it,” said the fishwife. “You’ll relax, out will pop the little sweetheart, and all will be well
in the morning. Thought you would smell of rosewater and fairy dew, but you stink like the rest of us.
Chew on, my duckie, chew on.”
At the sound of a knock, the crone looked up guiltily from the chest she was kneeling before and
rummaging through. She let the lid close with a bang and affected a position of prayer, eyes closed.
“Enter,” she called.
A maiden with tender skin and high color came in. “Oh, I hoped someone would be here,” she
said. “How is she?”
“Nearly out and so is the babe,” answered the fishwife. “An hour more, I reckon.”
“Well, I’m told to warn you. The men are drunk and on the prowl. They’ve been riled up by that
dragon of the magic clock, you know, and are looking for Frex to kill him. The clock said to. They’ll
likely stagger out here. We’d better get the wife safely away-can she be moved?”
No, I cannot be moved, thought Melena, and if the peasants find Frex tell them to kill him good
and hard for me, for I never knew a pain so extraordinary that it made me see the blood behind my
own eyes. Kill him for doing this to me. At this thought, she smiled in a moment of relief and passed
out.
“Let’s leave her here and run for it!” said the maiden. “The clock said to kill her too, and the
little dragon she’s going to give birth to. I don’t want to get caught.”
“We’ve got our own reputations to uphold,” said the fishwife. “We can’t abandon the fancy
ladything in mid-delivery. I don’t care what any clock says.”
The crone, her head back in the chest, said, “Anyone for some real lace from Gillikin?”
“There’s a hay cart in the lower field, but let’s do it now,” said the fishwife. “Come, help me
fetch it. You, old mother hag, get your face out of the linens and come dampen this pretty pink brow.
Right-o, now we go.”
A few minutes later the crone, the wife, and the maiden were trundling the hay cart along a
rarely used track through the spindles and bracken of the autumn woods. The wind had picked up. It
whistled over the treeless foreheads of the Cloth Hills. Melena, sprawled in blankets, heaved and
moaned in unconscious pain.
They heard a drunken mob pass, with pitchforks and torches, and the women stood silent and
terrified, listening to the slurred curses. Then they pressed on with greater urgency until they came
upon a foggy copse-the edge of the graveyard for unconsecrated corpses. Within it they saw the
blurred outlines of the clock. It had been left here for safekeeping by the dwarf-no fool he; he could
guess this particular corner of the world was the last place jumpy villagers would seek tonight. “The
dwarf and his boykins were drinking in the tavern too,” said the maiden breathlessly. “There’s no
one here to stop us!”
The crone said, “So you’ve been peering in the tavern windows at the men, you slut?” She
pushed open the door in the back of the clock.
She found a crawl space. Pendulums hung ominously in the gloom. Huge toothed wheels looked
primed to slice any trespasser into sausage rounds. “Come on, drag her in,” said the crone.
The night of torches and fog gave way, at dawn, to broad bluffs of thundercloud, dancing
skeletons of lightning. Glimpses of blue sky appeared briefly, though sometimes it rained so hard that
it seemed more like mud drops falling than water. The midwives, crawling on hands and knees out of
the back of the clock-wagon, had their little discharge at last. They protected the infant from the
dripping gutter. “Look, a rainbow,” said the senior, bobbing her head. A sickly scarf of colored light
hung in the sky.

What they saw, rubbing the caul and blood off the skin-was it just a trick of the light? After all,
following the storm the grass did seem to throb with its own color, the roses zinged and hovered
with crazy glory on their stems. But even with these effects of light and atmosphere, the midwives
couldn’t deny what they saw. Beneath the spit of the mother’s fluids the infant glistened a scandalous
shade of pale emerald.
There was no wail, no bark of newborn outrage. The child opened its mouth, breathed, and then
kept its own counsel. “Whine, you fiend,” said the crone, “it’s your first job.” The baby shirked its
obligations.
“Another willful boy,” said the fishwife, sighing. “Shall we kill it?”
“Don’t be so nasty to it,” said the crone, “it’s a girl.”
“Hah,” said the bleary-eyed maiden, “look again, there’s the weather vane.”
For a minute they were in disagreement, even with the child naked before them. Only after a
second and third rub was it clear that the child was indeed feminine. Perhaps in labor some bit of
organic effluvia had become caught and quickly dried in the cloven place. Once toweled, she was
observed to be prettily formed, with a long elegant head, forearms nicely turned out, clever pinching
little buttocks, cunning fingers with scratchy little nails.
And an undeniable green cast to the skin. There was a salmon blush in the cheeks and belly, a
beige effect around the clenched eyelids, a tawny stripe on the scalp showing the pattern of eventual
hair. But the primary effect was vegetable.
“Look what we get for our troubles,” said the maiden. “A little green pat of butter. Why don’t
we kill it? You know what people will say.”
“I think it’s rotten,” said the fishwife, and checked for the root of a tail, counted fingers and
toes. “It smells like dung.”
“That is dung you’re smelling, you idiot. You’re squatting in a cow pattypie.”
“It’s sick, it’s feeble, that’s why the color. Lose it in the puddle, drown the thing. She’ll never
know. She’ll be out for hours in her ladylike faints.”
They giggled. They cradled the infant in the crook of their arms, passing it around to test it for
weight and balance. To kill it was the kindest course of action. The question was how.
Then the child yawned, and the fishwife absentmindedly gave it a finger to nurse on, and the
child bit the finger off at the second knuckle. It almost choked on the gush of blood. The digit
dropped out of its mouth into the mud like a bobbin. The women catapulted into action. The fishwife
lunged to strangle the girl, and the crone and the maiden flared up in defense. The finger was dug out
of the mire and shoved in an apron pocket, possibly to sew back onto the hand that had lost it. “It’s a
cock, she just realized she didn’t have one,” screeched the maiden, and
fell on the ground laughing. “Oh, beware the stupid boy first tries to please himself with her!
She’ll snip his young sprout off for a souvenir!”
The midwives crawled back into the clock and dropped the thing at its mother’s breast, afraid
to consider mercy murder for fear of what else the baby might bite. “Maybe she’ll chop the tit next,
that’ll bring Her Drowsy Frailness around quick enough,” the crone chuckled. “Though what a child,
that sips blood even before its first suck of mother’s milk!” They left a pipkin of water nearby, and
under cover of the next squall they went squelching away, to find their sons and husbands and
brothers, and berate and beat them if they were available, or bury them if not.
In the shadows, the infant stared overhead at the oiled and regular teeth of time’s clock.
For days Melena couldn’t bear to look at the thing. She held it, as a mother must. She waited for
the groundwater of maternal affection to rise and overwhelm her. She did not weep. She chewed
pinlobble leaves, to float away from the disaster.
It was a she. It was a her. Melena practiced conversions in her thinking when she was alone.

The twitching, unhappy bundle was not male; it was not neutered; it was a female. It slept, looking
like a heap of cabbage leaves washed and left to drain on the table.
In a panic, Melena wrote to Coiwen Grounds to drag Nanny from her retirement. Frex went
ahead in a carriage to collect Nanny from the way station at Stonespar End. On the trip back, Nanny
asked Frex what was wrong.
“What is wrong.” He sighed, and was lost in thought. Nanny realized she had chosen her words
poorly; now Frex was distracted. He began to mumble in a general way about the nature of evil. A
vacuum set up by the inexplicable absence of the Unnamed God, and into which spiritual poison must
rush. A vortex.
“I mean what is the state of the child!” retorted Nanny explosively. “It’s not the universe but a
single child I need to hear about, if I’m going to be any help! Why does Melena call for me instead of
for her mother? Why is there no letter for her grandfather? He’s the Eminent Thropp, for goodness
sakes! Melena can’t have forgotten her duties so thoroughly, or is life out there in the country worse
than we thought?”
“It’s worse than we thought,” said Frex grimly. “The baby-you had better be prepared, Nanny,
so you don’t scream-the baby is damaged.”
“Damaged?” Nanny’s grip on her valise tightened and she looked out over the red-leafed
pearlfruit trees by the side of the road. “Frex, tell me everything.”
“It’s a girl,” said Frex.
“Damage indeed,” said Nanny mockingly, but Frex as usual missed the dig. “Well, at least the
family title’s preserved for another generation. Has she got all her limbs?” “Yes.”
“Any more than she needs?”
“No.”
“Is she sucking?”
“We can’t let it. It has extraordinary teeth, Nanny. It has shark’s teeth, or something like.”
“Well she won’t be the first child to grow on a bottle or a rag instead of a tit, don’t worry about
that.”
“It’s the wrong color,” said Frex.
“What color is the wrong color?”
For a few moments Frex could only shake his head. Nanny did not like him and she would not
like him, but she softened. “Frex, it can’t be that bad. There’s always a way out. Tell Nanny.”
“It’s green,” he finally said. “Nanny, it’s green as moss.”
“She’s green, you mean. It’s a she, for heaven’s sake.”
“It’s not for heaven’s sake.” Frex began to weep. “Heaven is not improved by it, Nanny; and
heaven does not approve. What are we to do!”
“Hush.” Nanny detested weeping men. “It can’t be as bad as all that. There isn’t a sniff of low
blood in Melena’s veins. Whatever blight the child has will respond to Nanny’s treatment. Trust
Nanny.”
“I trusted in the Unnamed God,” sobbed Frex.
“We don’t always work at cross purposes, God and Nanny,” said Nanny. She knew this was
blasphemous, but she couldn’t resist a gibe as long as Frex’s resistance was down. “But don’t
worry, I won’t breathe a word to Melena’s family. We’ll sort this all out in a flash, and no one need
know. The baby has a name?”
“Elphaba,” he said.
“After Saint Aelphaba of the Waterfall?”
“Yes.”

“A fine old name. You’ll use the common nickname Fabala, I suppose.”
“Who even knows if she’ll live long enough to grow into a nickname.” Frex sounded as if he
hoped this would be the case.
“Interesting country, are we in Wend Hardings yet?” Nanny asked, to change the subject. But
Frex had folded up inside, barely bothering to guide the horses onto the correct track. The country
was filthy, depressed, peasant-ridden; Nanny began to wish she had not set out in her best traveling
gown. Roadside robbers might expect to find gold on such a refined-looking older woman, and they
would be right, for Nanny sported a golden garter stolen years ago from Her Ladyship’s boudoir.
What a humiliation, if the garter should turn up these years later on Nanny’s well-turned if aging
thigh! But Nanny’s fears were unfounded, for the carriage arrived, without incident, in the yard of the
minister’s cottage.
“Let me see the baby first,” said Nanny. “It will be easier and fairer on Melena if I know what
we’re dealing with.” And this wasn’t hard to arrange, as Melena was out cold thanks to pinlobble
leaves, while the baby in a basket on the table wailed softly.
Nanny drew up a chair so she wouldn’t hurt herself if she fainted dead away. “Frex, put the
basket on the floor where I can look into it.” Frex obliged, and then went to return the horses and
carriage to Bree, who rarely needed them for mayoral duties but loaned them out to earn a little
political capital.
The infant was wrapped in linens, Nanny saw, and the baby’s mouth and ears were strapped
with a sling. The nose looked like a knob of bad mushroom, poking up for air, and the eyes were
open.
Nanny leaned closer. The child couldn’t be, what, three weeks old? Yet as Nanny moved from
side to side, looking at the profile of the forehead from this angle and that, so as to judge the shape of
the mind, the girl’s eyes tracked her back and forth. They were brown and rich, the color of
overturned earth, flecked with mica. There was a network of fragile red lines at each soft angle
where the eyelids met, as if the girl had been bursting the blood threads from the exertion of
watching and understanding.
And the skin, oh yes, the skin was green as sin. Not an ugly color, Nanny thought. Just not a
human color.
She reached out and let her finger drift across the baby’s cheek. The infant flinched, and her
backbone arched, and the wrapping, which was
tucked securely around the child from neck to toe, split open like a husk. Nanny gritted her teeth
and was determined not to be cowed. The baby had exposed herself sternum to groin, and the skin on
her chest was the same remarkable color. “Have you even touched this child yet, you two?”
murmured Nanny. She put her hand palm down on the child’s heaving chest, her fingers covering the
almost invisible baby nipples, then slid her hand down so she could check the apparatus below. The
child was wet and soiled but felt made according to standard design. The skin was the same miracle
of pliant smoothness that Melena had possessed as an Infant.
“Come to Nanny, you horrid little thing you.” Nanny leaned to pick the baby up, mess and all.
The baby swiveled to avoid the touch. Her head beat itself against the rush bottom of the basket.
“You’ve been dancing in the womb, I see,” said Nanny, “I wonder to whose music? Such welldeveloped muscles! No, you’re not getting away from me. Come here, you little demon. Nanny
doesn’t care. Nanny likes you.” She was lying through her teeth, but unlike Frex she believed some
lies were sanctioned by heaven.
And she got her hands on Elphaba, and settled her on her lap. There Nanny waited, crooning
and every now and then looking away, out the window, to recover herself and keep from vomiting.
She rubbed the baby’s belly to calm the girl down, but there was no calming her down, not yet

anyway.
Melena propped herself up on her elbows in the late afternoon when Nanny brought a tray with
tea and bread. “I have made myself at home,” said Nanny, “and I’ve made friends with your tiny
darling. Now come to your senses, sweetheart, and let me give you a kiss.”
“Oh, Nanny!” Melena allowed herself to be coddled. “Thank you for coming. Have you seen the
little monster?”
“She’s adorable,” said Nanny.
“Don’t lie and don’t be soft,” said Melena. “If you’re going to help you must be honest.”
“If I’m going to help, you must be honest,” said Nanny. “We need not go into it now, but I will
have to know everything, my sweet. So we can decide what’s to be done.” They sipped their tea, and
because
Elphaba had fallen asleep at last, it seemed for a few moments like the old days at Colwen
Grounds, when Melena would come home from afternoon walks with lithesome young gentry on the
make, and boast of their masculine beauty to a Nanny who pretended she had not noticed.
In fact, as the weeks went on, Nanny noticed quite a few disturbing things about the baby.
For one thing, Nanny tried to remove the baby’s bandages, but Elphaba seemed intent on biting
her own hands off, and the teeth inside that pretty, thin-lipped mouth were indeed monstrous. She
would bite a hole through the basket if she were left unfettered. She went after her own shoulder and
scraped it raw. She looked as if she were strangling.
“Can’t a barber be had to pull the teeth out?” Nanny asked. “At least until the baby learns some
self-control?”
“You’re out of your mind,” Melena said. “It will be all over the valley that the little marrow is
green. We’ll keep the jaw strapped up until we solve the skin problem.”
“However in the world did her skin come green?” Nanny wondered, stupidly, for Melena
blanched and Frex reddened, and the baby held her breath as if trying to turn blue to please them all.
Nanny had to slap her to make her breathe again.
Nanny interviewed Frex out in the yard. After the double blow of the birth and his public
embarrassment, he was not yet up to professional engagements and sat whittling praying beads out of
oak, scoring and inscribing them with emblems of the Namelessness of God. Nanny set Elphaba
down inside-she had an unreasonable fear of being overheard by this infant, and, worse, of being
understood-and Nanny sat scooping out a pumpkin for supper.
“I don’t suppose, Frex, that you have green in your family background,” she began, knowing full
well that Melena’s powerful grandfather would have confirmed such a predisposition before
agreeing to let his granddaughter marry a unionist minister-of all the chances she had!
“Our family isn’t about money or about earthly power,” said Frex, taking no offense for once.
“But I’m descended in a direct line from six ministers before me, father to son. We’re as well
regarded in spiritual circles as Melena’s family is in parlors and at the court of Ozma. And no, there
is no green, anywhere. I never heard of such a thing before in any family.”
Nanny nodded and said, “Well all right, I was only asking. I know you’re gooden than goblin
martyrs.”
“But,” Frex said humbly, “Nanny, I think I caused this thing to happen. My tongue slipped on the
day of the birthday-I announced that the devil was coming. I meant the Clock of the Time Dragon. But
suppose those words unlocked room for the devil?
“The child is no devil!” snapped Nanny. She’s no angel either, she thought, but kept it to
herself.
“On the other hand,” Frex continued, sounding more secure, “she may have been cursed by
Melena, accidentally, who took my remark the wrong way and wept about it. Maybe Melena opened

up inside herself a window through which an unattached sprite entered and colored the child.”
“On the very day she is to be born?” said Nanny. “That’s a capable sprite. Is your goodness so
exalted you attract the truly high-powered among the Spirits of Aberration?”
Frex shrugged. A few weeks earlier he would have nodded, but his confidence was shattered
with his abject failure in Rush Margins. He did not dare suggest what he feared: The child’s
abnormality was a punishment for his failure to protect his flock from the pleasure faith.
“Well Nanny asked practically, “if through a curse the goods were damaged, then through what
might the ill be overturned?”
“An exorcism,” said Frex.
“Are you empowered?”
“If I’m successful at changing her, we’ll know that I’m empowered,” said Frex. But now that he
had a goal, his spirits brightened. He would spend some days in fasting, rehearsing prayers, and
collecting supplies for the arcane ritual.
When he was off in the woods, and Elphaba napping, Nanny perched on the side of Melena’s
hard marriage mattress.
“Frex wonders if his prediction that the devil was coming caused a window in you to open,
letting an imp pass through to spoil the baby,” said Nanny. She was crocheting an edge of lace,
clumsily; she had never excelled at piecework, but she liked handling the polished ivory crochet
hook. “I wonder if you opened another window?”
Melena, groggy from pinlobble leaves as usual, arched an eyebrow in confusion.
“Did you sleep with someone other than Frex?” Nanny asked.
“Don’t be mad!” said Melena.
“I know you, honey,” said Nanny. “I’m not saying you’re not a good wife. But when you had the
boys buzzing around you in your parents’ orchard you changed your perfumed undergarments more
than once a day. You were lusty and sneaky and good at it. I’m not looking down at you. But don’t
pretend to me that your appetites weren’t healthy.”
Melena buried her face in the pillow. “Oh for those days!” she wailed. “It’s not that I don’t love
Frex! But I hate being better than the local peasant idiots!”
“Well, now this green child brings you down to their level, you ought to be pleased,” said
Nanny meanly.
“Nanny, I love Frex. But he leaves me alone so often! I would kill for some tinker to pass by
and sell me more than a tin coffeepot! I would pay well for someone less godly and more
imaginative!”
“That’s a question for the future,” said Nanny sensibly. “I’m asking you about the past. The
recent past. Since your marriage.”
But Melena’s face was vague and blurry. She nodded, she shrugged, she rocked her head.
“The obvious theory is an elf,” said Nanny.
“I wouldn’t have sex with an elf!” Melena shrieked.
“No more would I,” said Nanny, “but the green does give one pause. Are there elves in the
neighborhood?”
“There’s a gaggle of them, tree elves, up over the hill someplace, but if possible they are more
moronic than the fair citizens of Rush Margins. Really, Nanny, I’ve never even seen one, or only
from a distance. The idea is repulsive. Elves giggle at everything, do you know that? One of them
falls out of an oak and smashes his skull like a rotten turnip, and they gather and giggle and then
forget about him. It’s insulting of you even to bring it up.”
“Get used to it, if we don’t find a way out of this quagmire.”
“Well, the answer is no.”

“Then someone else. Someone handsome enough on the outside, but carrying a germ that maybe
you caught.”
Melena looked shocked. She hadn’t thought of her own health since Elphaba was born. Could
she be at risk?
“The truth,” said Nanny. “We must know.”
“The truth,” said Melena distantly. “Well, it is unknowable.”
“What are you trying to say?”
“I don’t know the answer to your question.” And Melena explained. Yes, the cottage was off the
beaten track, and of course she never passed more than the curtest greetings with local farmers and
fishermen and thickheads. But more travelers took to the hills and woods than you would credit.
Often she had sat, listless and lonely, while Frex was off preaching, and she had found comfort in
giving passersby a simple meal and a buoyant conversation.
“And more?”
But on those boring days, Melena muttered, she had taken to chewing pinlobble leaves. When
she would awake, because the sun was setting or Frex was there frowning or grinning at her, she
remembered little.
“You mean you indulged in adultery and you don’t even have the benefit of a good saucy
memory about it?” Nanny was scandalized.
“I don’t know that I did!” said Melena. “I wouldn’t choose to, I mean not if I was thinking
clearly. But I remember once when a tinker with a funny accent gave me a draft of some heady brew
from a green glass bottle. And I had rare expansive dreams, Nanny, of the Other World-cities of
glass and smoke-noise and color-I tried to remember.”
“So you could well have been raped by elves. Won’t your grandfather be pleased to learn how
Frex is taking care of you.”
“Stop!” cried Melena.
“Well, I don’t know what’s to be done!” Nanny lost her temper at last. “Everyone’s being
irresponsible! If you can’t remember whether your marriage vows have been broken or not, there’s
not much good in acting like an offended saint.”
“We can always drown the baby and start over.”
“Just try drowning that thing,” muttered Nanny. “I pity the poor lake asked to take her in.”
Later, Nanny went through Melena’s small collection of medicines-herbs, drops, roots,
brandies, leaves. She was wondering, without much hope, if she could invent something that might
cause the girl’s skin to blanch. In the back of the chest Nanny found the green glass bottle spoken of
by Melena. The light was bad and her eyes weren’t strong, but she
could make out the words MIRACLE ELIXIR on a piece of paper pasted to the front.
Though she had a native skill in healing, Nanny was unable to come up with a skin-changing
potion. Bathing the child in cow’s milk didn’t make the skin white, either. But the child would not
allow herself to be lowered into a pail of lake water; she twisted like a cat in panic. Nanny kept on
with the cow’s milk. It left a horrid sour stink if she did not rub it off thoroughly with a cloth.
Frex organized an exorcism. It involved candles and hymns. Nanny watched from a distance.
The man was beady-eyed, perspiring with effort even though the mornings were colder and colder.
Elphaba slept in her binding cloth in the middle of the carpet, oblivious to the sacrament.
Nothing happened. Frex fell, exhausted and spent, and cradled his green daughter within the
crook of his arm, as if finally embracing the proof of some undisclosed sin. Melena’s face hardened.
There was only one thing left to try. Nanny gathered the courage to bring it up on the day she
was to leave back for Colwen Grounds.
“We see that peasant treatments don’t work,” said Nanny, “and spiritual intercession has failed.

Do you have the courage to think about sorcery? Is there someone local who could magic the green
venom out of the child?”
Frex was up and lashing out at Nanny, swinging his fists. Nanny fell backward off her stool, and
Melena bobbed about her, shrieking. “How dare you!” cried Frex. “In this household! Isn’t this green
girl insult enough? Sorcery is the refuge of the amoral; when it isn’t out-and-out charlatanism, it is
dangerously evil! Contracts with the demons!”
Nanny said, “Oooh, preserve me! You fine, fine man, don’t you know enough to fight fire with
fire?”
“Nanny, enough,” said Melena.
“Hitting a feeble old woman,” said Nanny, hurt. “Who only tries to help.”
The next morning Nanny packed her valise. There was nothing more that she could do, and she
wasn’t willing to live the rest of her life with a fanatical hermit and a ruined baby, even for the sake
of Melena.
Frex drove Nanny back to the inn at Stonespar End, for the coachand-four to take her home.
Nanny knew Melena might still think about
killing the child, but somehow she doubted it. Nanny held her valise to her ample bosom,
fearing bandits again. Inside her valise was hidden her gold garter (she could always claim it had
been planted there without her knowledge, whereas it would have been hard to claim it had been
planted on her leg in the same circumstances). She also had squirreled away the ivory crochet hook,
three of Frex’s prayer beads because she liked the carvings, and the pretty green glass bottle left
behind by some itinerant salesman selling, apparently, dreams and passion and somnolence.
She didn’t know what she thought. Was Elphaba devil’s spawn? Was she half-elf? Was she
punishment for her father’s failure as a preacher, or for her mother’s sloppy morals and bad
memory? Or was she merely a physical ailment, a blight like a misshapen apple or a five-legged
calf? Nanny knew her worldview was foggy and chaotic, pestered by demons, faith, and folk
science. It didn’t escape her attention, however, that both Melena and Frex had believed
uncompromisingly that they would have a boy. Frex was the seventh son of a seventh son, and to add
to that powerful equation he was descended from six ministers in a row. VVhatever child of either
(or any) sex could dare follow in so auspicious a line?
Perhaps, thought Nanny, little green Elphaba chose her own sex, and her own color, and to hell
with her parents.
For one short, wet month, early in the next year, the drought lifted. Spring tipped in like green
well water, frothing at the hedges, bubbling at the roadside, splashing from the cottage roof in
garlands of ivy and stringflower. Melena went about the yard in a state of mild undress, so that she
could feel the sun on her pale skin and the deep warmth she had missed all winter. Strapped in her
chair in the doorway, Elphaba, now a year and a half old, hit her breakfast minnow with the bowl of
her spoon. “Oh, eat the thing, don’t mash it,” said Melena, but mildly. Since the child’s chin-sling
had been removed, mother and daughter had begun to pay some attention to each other. To her
surprise, Melena sometimes found Elphaba endearing, the way a baby should be.
This view was the only thing she had seen since leaving the elegant mansion of her family, the
only thing she would ever gaze upon again- the windswept surface of Illswater, the distant dark stone
cottages and chimneys of Rush Margins on the other side, the hills lying in a torpor beyond. She
would go mad; the world was nothing but water and want. If a frolic of elves scampered through the
yard she would leap on them for company, for sex, for murder.
“You father is a fraud,” she said to Elphaba. “Off finding himself all winter, leaving me with
only you for company. Eat that breakfast, for you’ll get no more if you throw it on the ground.”
Elphaba picked up the fish and threw it on the ground.

“Your father is a charlatan,” continued Melena. “He used to be very good in bed for a religious
man, and this is how I know his secret. Holy men are supposed to be above earthly pleasures, but
your father enjoyed his midnight wrestling. Once upon a time! We must never tell him we know he’s
a humbug, it would break his heart. We don’t want
to break his heart, do we?” And then Melena burst into a high peal of laughter.
Elphaba’s face was unsmiling, unchanging. She pointed to the fish.
“Breakfast. Breakfast in the dirt. Breakfast for the bugs,” Melena said. She dropped the collar
of her spring robe a little lower and the pink yoke of her bare shoulders gyrated. “Shall we go walk
by the edge of the lake today and maybe you’ll drown?”
But Elphaba would never drown, never, because she would not go near the lake.
“Maybe we’ll go out in a boat and tip over!” Melena shrieked.
Elphaba cocked her head to one side as if listening for some part of her mother not intoxicated
with leaves and wine.
The sun swept out from behind a cloud. Elphaba scowled. Melena’s robe dropped lower. Her
breasts worked their way out from between the dirty ruffles of the collar.
Look at me, thought Melena, showing my breasts to the child I couldn’t give milk to for fear of
amputation. I who was the rose of Nest Hardings, I who was the beauty of my generation! And now I
am reduced to company I don’t even want, my own squirming thorny little girl. She is more
grasshopper than girl, with those angular little thighs, those arching eyebrows, those poking fingers.
She’s about the business of learning like any child, but she takes no delight in the world: She pushes
and breaks and nibbles on things without any pleasure. As if she has a mission to taste and measure
all the disappointments of life. In which Rush Margins is amply supplied. Mercy from the Unnamed
God, she’s a creep, she is. She is.
“Or we might take a walk in the woods today and pick the last of the winter berries.” Melena
was full of guilt at her lack of motherly feeling. “We can put them in a pie. Can we put them in a pie?
Shall we, honey?”
Elphaba didn’t speak yet, but she nodded, and began to wiggle to get down. Melena started a
clapping game Elphaba took no notice of. The child grunted and pointed to the ground, and arched
her long elegant legs to illustrate her desire. Then she gestured to the gate leading from the kitchen
garden and the hen yard.
There was a man at the uprights of the gate, leaning, shy and hungry-looking, with skin the color
of roses at twilight: a dusky, shadowy red. He had a couple of leather satchels on his shoulders and
back, and a
walking staff, and a dangerously handsome, hollow-looking face. Melena screeched and caught
herself, directed her voice to a lower register. It had been so long since she had spoken to anyone but
a whining toddler. “Good glory, you startled us!” she cried. “Are you searching for some breakfast?”
She had lost the social touch. For instance, her breasts should not be staring at him so. Yet she did
not clasp her gown.
“Please to forgive a sudden appearance by a strange foreigner at Lady’s gate,” said the man.
“Forgiven, of course,” she said impatiently. “Come in where I can see you-come in, come in!”
Elphaba had seen so few other people in her life that she hid one eye behind her spoon, and
peeked with the other eye.
The man approached. His movements showed the clumsiness of exhaustion. He was large of
ankle and thick of foot, slender about the waist and shoulders, and thick again in the neck-as if he had
been made on a lathe, and worked too briefly at the extremities. His hands, letting down the satchels,
seemed like beasts with minds of their own. They were outsized and splendid.
“Traveler not to know where he is,” said the man. “Two nights to cross the hills from Downhill

Comings. To look for the inn at Three Dead Trees. To rest.”
“You’re lost, you’ve veered,” said Melena, deciding not to be perplexed at his scrambled
words. “No matter. Let me fix you a meal and you can tell me your story.” Her hands were at her
hair, which once used to be thought precious as spun brass. At least it was clean.
The man was sleek and fit. When he removed his cap his hair fell out in greasy hanks, sunset
red. He washed at the pump, stripping off his shirt, and Melena noticed it was nice to see a waist on
a man again (Frex, bless him, had run to plumpness in the year-and-some since Elphaba’s birth).
Were all Quadlings this delicious dusty rose color? The man’s name, Melena learned, was Turtle
Heart, and he was a glassblower from Owels, in little-known Quadling Country.
She bundled up her breasts at last, reluctantly. Elphaba squawked to be let loose, and without
so much as flinching the visitor unbuckled her and swept her in the air and caught her again. The
child crowed with surprise, even delight, and Turtle Heart repeated the trick. Melena took advantage
of his concentration on the brat to scoop up the uneaten minnow from the dirt and rinse it off. She
plopped it among the eggs and mashed tar root, hoping that Elphaba would not suddenly learn to
speak and embarrass her. It would be just like the child to do that.
But Elphaba was too charmed by this man to fuss or complain. She didn’t even whine when
Turtle Heart finally came to the bench and sat to eat. She crawled between his sleek, hairless calves
(for he had shucked off his leggings) and she moaned some private tune with a satisfied smirk on her
face. Melena found herself jealous of a female not yet two years old. She wouldn’t have minded
sitting on the ground between Turtle Heart’s legs.
“I’ve never met a Quadling before,” she said, too loudly, too brightly. The months of solitude
had made hem forget hem manners. “My family would never have Quadlings in to dine-not that there
were many, or even any for all I know, in the farmlands around my family’s estate. The stories make
out that Quadlings were sneaky and incapable of telling the truth.”
“How can a Quadling to answer such a charge if a Quadling is given always to lie?” He smiled
at her.
She melted like butter on warm bread. “I’ll believe anything you say.” He told her of the life in
the outreaches of Ovvels, the houses rotting gently into the swamp, the harvest of snails and
murkweed, the customs of communal living and ancestor worship. “So you believe your ancestors
are with you?” she prodded. “I don’t mean to be nosy but I’ve become interested in religion despite
myself.”
“Does Lady to believe ancestors are with her?”
She could hardly focus on the question, so bright were his eyes, and so wonderful it was to be
called Lady. Her shoulders straightened. “My immediate ancestors couldn’t be farther away,” she
admitted. “I mean my parents- they’re still living, but so uninteresting to me they might as well be
dead.”
“When dead they may to visit Lady often.”
“They are not welcome. Go away.” She laughed, shooing. “You mean ghosts? They’d better not.
That’s what I’d call the worst of both worlds-if there is an Other Land.”
“There is an otherworld,” he said with certainty.
She felt chilled. She scooped Elphaba up and hugged her tightly. Elphaba sagged as if boneless
in her arms, neither fussing nor returning the hug, just falling limp from the novelty of being touched.
“Are you a seer?” said Melena.
“Turtle Heart to blow glass,” he said. He seemed to mean that as an answer.
Melena was suddenly reminded of the dreams she used to have, of exotic places she knew she
was too dull to invent. “Married to a minister, and I don’t know that I believe in an otherworld,” she
admitted. She hadn’t meant to say that she was married, although she supposed the child implicated

her.
But Turtle Heart had finished talking. He put down his plate (he had left the minnow) and he
took from his satchels a small pot, a pipe, and some sacks of sand and soda ash and lime and other
minerals. “Might Turtle Heart to thank Lady for her welcome?” he asked; she nodded.
He built up the kitchen fire and sorted and mixed his ingredients, and arranged utensils, and
cleaned the bowl of his pipe with a special rag folded in its own pouch. Elphaba sat clumplike, her
green hands on her green toes, curiosity on her sharp pinched face.
Melena had never seen glass blown, just as she had never seen paper made, cloth woven, or
logs hewn from tree trunks. It seemed as marvelous to her as the local stories of the traveling clock
that had hexed her husband into the professional paralysis from which he still hadn’t quite escapedthough he tried.
Turtle Heart hummed a note through his nose or the pipe as he blew an irregular bulb of hot
greenish ice. It steamed and hissed in the air. He knew what to do with it; he was a wizard of glass;
Melena had to hold Elphaba back to keep her from burning her hands as she reached for it.
In what seemed like no time at all, in what felt like magic, the glass had gone from being
semiliquid and abstract to a hardening, cooling reality.
It was a smooth, impure circle, like a slightly oblong plate. All the while Turtle Heart worked
with it, Melena thought of her own character, going from youthful ether to hardening shell,
transparently empty. Breakable, too. But before she could lose herself in remorse, Turtle Heart took
her two hands and passed them near, but not touching, the flat surface of the glass.
“Lady to talk with ancestors,” he said. But she would not struggle to connect with old boring
dead people in the Other Land, not when his huge hands covered hers. She breathed through her nose
to suppress the smell of breakfast in an unwashed mouth (fruit and one glass of wine, or was it
two?). She thought she might well faint.
“Look in glass,” he urged her. She could only look at his neck and his raspberry-honey-colored
chin.
He looked for her. Elphaba came and steadied herself with a small hand on his knee and peered
in, too.
“Husband Is near,” said Turtle Heart. Was this prophecy through a glass dish or was he asking
her a question? But he went on: “Husband is traveling on a donkey and to bring elderly woman to
visit you. Is ancestor to visit?”
“Is old nursemaid, probably,” Melena said. She was sloping downward into his crippled
syntax, in unabashed sympathy. “Can you really to see that in there?”
He nodded. Elphaba nodded too, but at what?
“How much time do we have before he gets here?” she asked.
“Till this evening.”
They did not speak another word until sunset. They banked the fire and hooked Elphaba to a
harness, and sat her down in front of the cooling glass, which they hung on a string like a lens or a
mirror. It seemed to mesmerize and calm her; she did not even gnaw absentmindedly at her wrists or
toes. They left the door to the cottage open so that, from time to time, they could peer out from the
bed to check on the child who, in the glare of a sunny day, would not be able to focus her eyes to see
in the house shadows, and who anyway never turned to look. Turtle Heart was unbearably beautiful.
Melena dragon-snaked with him, covered him with her mouth, poured him in her hands, heated and
cooled and shaped his luminosity. He filled her emptiness.
They were washed, and dressed, with supper mostly made, when the donkey brayed a half mile
down the lake. Melena blushed. Turtle Heart was back at the pipe, blowing again. Elphaba turned
and looked in the direction of the donkey’s serrated statement. Her lips, which always looked almost

black against the new-apple color of her skin, twisted tight, chewed against each other. She bit her
lower lip as if thinking, but she did not bleed; she had learned to manage the teeth somewhat, through
trial and error. She put her hand on the shining disc. The glass circlet caught the last blue of the sky,
until it looked like a magic mirror showing nothing but silver-cold water within.
All the way from Stonespar End, where Frex met her coach, Nanny complained. Lumbago,
weak kidneys, fallen arches, aching gums, sore haunches. Frex wanted to say, And how about your
swollen ego? Though he had been out of circulation for a while, he knew such a remark would be
rude. Nanny flounced and petted herself, clinging determinedly to her seat until they arrived at the
lodge near Rush Margins.
Melena greeted Frex with affecting shyness. “My breastplate, my backbone,” she murmured.
She was slender after a hard winter, her cheekbones more prominent. Her skin looked scoured as if
by an artist’s scratch brush-but she had always had the look of an etching-in-the-flesh. She was
usually bold with her kisses and he found her reticence alarming until he realized there was a
stranger in the shadows. Then, after introductions, Nanny and Melena fussed to get a meal on the
table, and Frex put out some oats for the sorry nag who had to pull the carriage. When this was done
he went to sit in the spring evening light and to meet his daughter again.
Elphaba was cautious around him. He found in his pouch a trinket he’d whittled for her, a little
sparrow with a cunning beak and upraised wings. “Look, Fabala,” he whispered (Melena hated the
derivative, so he used it: it was his and Elphaba’s private bond, the father-daughter pact against the
world). “Look what I found in the forest. A little maplewood bird.”
The child took the thing in her hands. She touched it softly, and put its head in her mouth. Frex
steeled himself to hear the inevitable splintering, and to hold back his sigh of disappointment. But
Elphaba did not bite. She sucked the head and looked at it again. Wet, it had greater life.
“You like it,” Frex said.
She nodded, and began to feel its wings. Now that she was distracted, Frex could draw her
between his knees. He nuzzled his crinkly-bearded chin into her hair she smelled like soap and wood
smoke, and the char on toast, a good healthy smell-and he closed his eyes. It was good to be home.
He had spent the winter in an abandoned shepherd’s hut on the windward slope of Griffon’s
Head. Praying and fasting, moving deeper inside and then further outside himself. And why not? At
home, he had felt the scorn of the people of the whole claustrophobic valley of Illswater; they had
connected the Time Dragon’s slanderous story of a corrupt minister with the arrival of a deformed
child. They had drawn their own conclusions. They avoided his chapel services. So a sort of
hermit’s life, at least in small intervals, had seemed both penance and preparation for something
else, something next-but what?
He knew this life wasn’t what Melena had originally expected, mar-tying him. With his
bloodlines, Frex had looked primed for an elevation to proctor or even, eventually, bishop. He had
imagined the happiness Melena would have as a society dame, presiding over feast day dinners and
charity balls and episcopal teas. Instead-he could see her in the firelight, grating a last, limp winter
carrot onto a pan of fish-here she wasted away, a partner in a difficult marriage on a cold, shadowy
lakeshore. Frex had a notion that she wasn’t sorry to see him go off from time to time, so that she
could be glad to see him come back.
As he ruminated, his beard tickled Elphaba’s neck, and she snapped the wings off her wooden
sparrow. She sucked on it like a whistle. Twisting away from him, she ran to a glass lens hanging
from the projecting cave, and swatted at it.
“Don’t, you’ll break that!” said her father.
“She cannot to break that.” The traveler, the Quadling, came from the sink where he had been
washing up.

“She just turned her toy into a cripple,” Frex said, pointing at the ruined bridling.
“She is herself pleased at the half things,” Turtle Heart said. “I think. The little girl to play with
the broken pieces better.”
Frex didn’t quite get it, but nodded. He knew that months away from the human voice made him
clumsy at first. The boy from the inn,
who had climbed Griffon’s Head to deliver Nanny’s request to be picked up at Stonespar End,
had obviously thought Frex a wild man, grunting and unkempt. Frex had had to quote a little of the
Ozlad to indicate some sort of humanity-“Land of green abandon, land of endless leaf”-it was all that
would come to him.
“Why can’t she break it?” asked Frex.
“Because I do not to make it to be broken,” answered Turtle Heart. But he smiled at Frex, not
aggressively. And Elphaba wandered around with the shiny glass as if it were a toy, catching
shadows, reflections, lights on its imperfect surface, almost as if she were playing.
“Where are you going?” asked Frex, just as Turtle Heart was saying, “Where are you from?”
“I’m a Munchkinlander,” said Frex.
“I to think all Munchkins to be shorter than I or you.”
“The peasants, the farmers, yes,” Frex said, “but anyone with bloodlines worth tracing married
into height somewhere along the way. And you? You’re from Quadling Country.”
“Yes,” said the Quadling. His reddish hair had been washed and was drying into an airy
nimbus. Frex was glad to see Melena so generous as to offer a passerby water to bathe in. Perhaps
she was adjusting to country life after all. Because, mercy, a Quadling ranked about as low on the
social ladder as it was possible to get and still be human.
“But I to understand,” said the Quadling. “Ovvels is a small world. Until I to leave, I am not to
know of hills, one beyond the other and from the spiny backbones a world so wide around. The
blurry far away to hurt my eyes, for I cannot to make it seen. Please sir to describe the world you
know.”
Frex picked up a stick In the soil he drew an egg on its side. “What they taught me in lessons,”
he said. “Inside the circle is Oz. Make an
he did so, through the oval-“and roughly speaking, you have a pie in four sections. The top Is
Gillikin Full of cities and universities and theatres, civilized life, they say. And industry.” He moved
clockwise. “East, is Munchkinland, where we are now. Farmland, the bread basket of Oz, except
down in the mountainous south-these strokes, in the district of Wend Hardings, are the hills you’re
climbing.” He bumped and squiggled. “Directly south of the center of Oz is Quadling Country.
Badlands, I’m
told–marshy, useless, infested with bugs and feverish airs.” Turtle Heart looked puzzled at this,
but nodded. “Then west, what they call Winkie Country. Don’t know much about that except it’s dry
and unpopulated.”
“And around?” said Turtle Heart.
“Sandstone deserts north and west, fleckstone desert east and south. They used to say the desert
sands were deadly poison; that’s just standard propaganda. Keeps invaders from Ev and Quox from
trying to get in. Munchkinland is rich and desirable farming territory, and Gillikin’s not bad either. In
the Glikkus, up here”-he scratched lines in the northeast, on the border between Gillikin and
Munchkinland-“are the emerald mines and the famous Glikkus canals. I gather there’s a dispute
whether the Glikkus is Munchkinlander or Gillikinese, but I have no opinion on that.”
Turtle Heart moved his hands over the drawing in the dirt, flexing his palms, as if he were
reading the map from above. “But here?” he said. “What is here?”
Frex wondered if he meant the air above Oz. “The realm of the Unnamed God?” he said. “The

Other Land? Are you a unionist?”
“Turtle Heart is glassblower,” said Turtle Heart.
“I mean religiously.”
Turtle Heart bowed his head and didn’t meet Frex’s eye. “Turtle Heart is not to know what
name to call this.”
“I don’t know about Quadlings,” said Frex, warming to a possible convert. “But Gillikinese and
Munchkinlanders are largely unionist. Since Lurlinist paganism went out. For centuries, there have
been unionist shrines and chapels all over Oz. Are there none in Quadling Country?”
“Turtle Heart does not to recognize what is this,” he said.
“And now respectable unionists are going in droves over to the pleasure faith,” said Frex,
snorting, “or even tiktokism, which hardly even qualifies as a religion. To the ignorant everything is
spectacle these days. The ancient unionist monks and aunts knew their place in the universeacknowledging the life source too sublime to be named-and now we sniff up the skirts of every musty
magician who comes along. Hedonists, anarchists, solipsists! Individual freedom and amusement is
all! As if sorcery had any moral component! Charms, alley magic, industrial-strength sound and light
displays, fake shape-changers! Charlatans, nabobs of necromancy, chemical and herbal wisdoms,
humbug hedonists!
Selling their bog recipes and crone aphorisms and schoolboy spells! It makes me sick.”
Turtle Heart said, “Shall Turtle Heart to bring you water, shall Turtle Heart to lie you down?”
He put fingers soft as calfskin on the side of Frex’s neck. Frex shivered and realized he had been
shouting. Nanny and Melena were standing in the doorway with the pan of fish, silent.
“It’s a figure of speech, I’m not sick,” he said, but he was touched at the concern the foreigner
had shown. “I think we’ll eat.”
And they did. Elphaba ignored her food except to prod the eyes out of the baked fish and to try
to fit them onto her wingless bird. Nanny grumbled good-naturedly about the wind off the lake, her
chills, her backbone, her digestion. Her gas was apparent from more than a few feet away and Frex
moved, as discreetly as possible, to be upwind. He found himself sitting next to the Quadling on the
bench.
“So is all that clear to you?” Frex pointed a fork at the map of Oz.
“Is Emerald City to be where?” said the Quadling, fish bones poking out from between his lips.
“Dead center,” Frex said.
“And there is Ozma,” said Turtle Heart.
“Ozma, the ordained Queen of Oz, or so they say,” Frex said, “though the Unnamed God must be
ruler of all, in our hearts.”
“How can unnamed creature to rule-” began Turtle Heart.
“No theology at dinner,” sang out Melena, “that’s a house rule dating from the start of our
marriage, Turtle Heart, and we obey it.”
“Besides, I still harbor a devotion to Lurline.” Nanny made a face in Frex’s direction. “Old
folks like me are allowed to. Do you know about Lurline, stranger?”
Turtle Heart shook his head.
“If we have no theology then we surely have no arrant pagan nonsense-” began Frex, but Nanny,
being a guest and invoking a touch of deafness when it suited her, plowed on.
“Lurline is the Fairy Queen who flew over the sandy wastes, and spotted the green and lovely
land of Oz below. She left her daughter Ozma to rule the country in her absence and she promised to
return to Oz in its darkest hour.”
“Hah!” said Frex.
“No hahs at me.” Nanny sniffed. “I’m as entitled to my beliefs as you are, Frexspar the Godly.

At least they don’t get me into trouble as yours do.”
“Nanny, govern your temper,” said Melena, enjoying this.
“It’s rubbish,” said Frex. “Ozma rules in the Emerald City, and anyone who’s seen her, or
paintings of her, knows that she’s from Gillikinese stock. She’s got the same broad band of forehead,
the slightly gapped front teeth, the frenzy of curling blond hair, the quick shifts of mood- usually into
anger. All characteristic of Gillikinese peoples. You’ve seen her, Melena, tell him.”
“Oh, she is elegant in her way,” Melena admitted.
“The daughter of a Fairy Queen?” said Turtle Heart.
“More nonsense,” said Frex.
“Not nonsense!” snapped Nanny.
“They think she bears herself again and again like a phoenix,” said Frex. “Hah and double hah.
There’ve been three hundred years of very different Ozmas. Ozma the Mendacious was a dedicated
aunt, who lowered rulings in a bucket down from the topmost chamber in a cloister tower. She was
as mad as a bung beetle. Ozma the Warrior conquered the Glikkus, at least for a time, and
commandeered the emeralds with which to decorate the Emerald City. Ozma the librarian did
nothing but read genealogies for her whole life long. Then there was Ozma the Scarcely Beloved,
who kept pet ermines. She overtaxed the farmers to begin the road system of yellow brick that
they’re still struggling to complete, and much luck to them, I say.”
“Who is Ozma now?” asked Turtle Heart.
“Actually,” said Melena, “I had the pleasure to meet the last Ozma at a social season in the
Emerald City-my grandfather the Eminent Thropp had a town house. The winter I was fifteen I was
brought out into society there. She was Ozma the Bilious, because of a bad stomach. She was the size
of a lake narwhal, but she dressed beautifully. I saw her with her husband, Pastorius, at the Oz
Festival of Song and Sentiment.”
“She is no longer the Queen?” asked Turtle Heart, confused.
“She died in an unfortunate accident involving some rat poison,” said Frex.
“Died,” said Nanny, “or her spirit moved next into her child, Ozma Tippetarius.”
“The current Ozma is just about the age of Elphaba,” said Melena, “so her father, Pastorius, is
the Ozma Regent. The good man will rule until Ozma Tippetarius is old enough to take the throne.”
Turtle Heart shook his head. Frex was annoyed because they had spent so much time talking
about the worldly ruler and ignored the eternal realm, and Nanny lapsed into a bout of indigestion for
which they all were very sorry, olfactorily speaking.
Anyway, even being irritated, Frex was glad to be home. Because of the beauty of Melena-she
was almost glowing tonight as the sun left the sky-and because of the surprise of Turtle Heart,
smiling and un-self-conscious next to him. Maybe because of Turtle Heart’s religious emptiness,
which Frex found challenging and appealing, almost tempting.
“Then there’s the dragon beneath Oz, in a hidden cavern,” Nanny was saying to Turtle Heart.
“The dragon who has dreamt the world, and who will burn it in flames when he awakes-“
“Shut up that superstitious codswallop!” shouted Frex.
Elphaba, on all fours, advanced on the uneven planks of the flooring. She bared her teeth-as if
she knew what a dragon was, as if she were pretending-and roared. Her green skin made her more
persuasive, as if she were a dragon child. She roared again-“Oh sweetheart, don’t,” said Frex-and
she peed on the floor, and sniffed her urine with satisfaction and disgust.
One afternoon toward the end of summer, Nanny said, “There’s a beast abroad. I’ve seen it at
dusk several times, lurking about in the ferns. What sorts of creatures are native to these hills
anyway?”
“You don’t find anything larger than a gopher,” said Melena. They were at the side of the brook,

working at laundry. The small spring wetness had long since ceased, and the drought had clamped its
hand down again. The stream was only a thin trickle. Elphaba, who would not come near the water,
was stripping a wild pear tree of its stunted crop. She clung to the trunk with her hands and outturned feet, and threw her head around, catching the sour fruit with her teeth and then spitting seeds
and stem on the ground.
“This is larger than a gopher,” said Nanny. “Trust me. Have you bears? It could have been a
bear cub, though it moved mighty fast.”
“No bears. There’s the rumor of rock tigers on the felltop, but they tell me not a single one has
been sighted in ages. And rock tigers are notoriously skittish and shy. They don’t come near human
dwellings.”
“A wolf then? Are there wolves?” Nanny let the sheet droop in the water. “It could have been a
wolf.”
“Nanny, you think you’re in the desert. Wend Hardings is desolate, I agree, but it’s a tame
barrenness for all that. You’re alarming me with your wolf and your tiger talk.”
Elphaba, who would not speak yet, made a low growl in the pocket of her throat.
“I don’t like it,” said Nanny. “Let’s finish up and dry these things back at the house. Enough is
enough. Besides, I have other things I want to say to you. Let’s give the child to Turtle Heart and
let’s go off somewhere.” She shuddered. “Somewhere safe.”
“What you have to say you can say within earshot of Elphaba,” said Melena. “You know she
doesn’t understand a word.”
“You confuse not speaking with not listening,” said Nanny. “I think she understands plenty.”
“Look, she’s smearing fruit on her neck, like a cologne-“
“Like a war paint, you mean.”
“Oh, dour Nanny, stop being such a goose and scrub those sheets harder. They’re filthy.”
“I need hardly ask whose sweat and leakage this is .
“Oh you, no you needn’t ask, but don’t start moralizing at me-“
“But you know Frex is bound to notice sooner or later. These energetic afternoon naps you takewell, you always had an eye for the fellow with a decent helping of sausage and hard-boiled eggs-“
“Nanny, come, this is none of your affair.”
“More’s the pity,” said Nanny, sighing. “Isn’t aging a cruel hoax? I’d trade my hard-won pearls
of wisdom for a good romp with Uncle Flagpole any day.”
Melena flipped a handful of water in Nanny’s face to shut her up. The older woman blinked and
she said, “Well, it’s your garden, plant there what you choose and reap what you may. What I want to
talk about is the child, anyway.”
The girl was now squatting behind the pear tree, eyes narrowed at something in the distance.
She looked, thought Melena, like a sphinx, like a stone beast. A fly even landed on her face and
walked across the bridge of her nose, and the child didn’t flinch or squirm. Then, suddenly, she
leaped and pounced, a naked green kitten after an invisible butterfly.
“What about her?”
“Melena, she needs to get used to other children. She’ll start talking a little bit if she sees that
other chicks are talking.”
“Talking among children is an overrated concept.”
“Don’t be glib. You know she needs to get used to people other than us. She’s not going to have
an easy time of it anyhow, unless she sheds her greeny skin as she grows up. She needs the habits of
conversation. Look, I give her chores to do, I warble nursery rhymes at her. Melena, why doesn’t she
respond like other children?”
“She’s boring. Some children just are.”

“She ought to have other pups to play with. They would infect her with a sense of fun.”
“Frankly, Frex doesn’t expect a child of his to be interested in fun,” said Melena. “Fun is
counted for overmuch in this world, Nanny. I agree with him on that.”
“So your dragon-snaking with Turtle Heart is what-devotional exercises?”
“I said don’t be catty, please!” Melena focused on the toweling, beating it with annoyance.
Nanny would go on about this; she was up to something. And Nanny had hit the nail on the head.
There crept Turtle Heart into the cool shadows of the cottage, when Melena was tired from a
morning’s work in the vegetable garden. He covered her with a sense of holiness, and it was more
than her undergarments that would drop away from her when they tumbled panting onto the
bedclothes. She would lose her sense of shame.
She knew this did not follow conventional reason. Nevertheless, should a tribunal of unionist
ministers call her to court for adultery, she would tell the truth. Somehow Turtle Heart had saved her
and restored her sense of grace, of hope in the world. Her belief in the goodness of things had been
dashed into bits when little green Elphaba crawled into being. The child was extravagant punishment
for a sin so minor she didn’t even know if she had committed it.
It was not the sex that saved her, though the sex was mighty vigorous, even frightening. It was
that Turtle Heart didn’t blush when Frex showed up, that he didn’t shrink from beastly little Elphaba.
He set up shop in the side yard, blowing glass and grinding it, as if life had brought him here just to
redeem Melena. Wherever else he might have been heading had been forgotten.
“Very well, you old interfering cow,” said Melena. “For the sake of argument, what do you
propose?”
“We must take Elphie to Rush Margins and find some small children for her to play with.”
Melena sat back on her haunches. “But you have to be jesting!” she cried. “Slow and deliberate
as Elphaba is, at least she’s unharmed here! I may not be able to summon much maternal warmth, but
I feed her, Nanny, and I keep her from hurting herself! How cruel, to inflict the outside world on her! A green child will be an open invitation for scorn and abuse. And children
are wickeder than adults, they have no sense of restraint. We might as well go throw her in the lake
she’s so terrified of.”
“No no no,” said Nanny, putting her fat hands on her own knees; her voice was thick with
determination. “Now I am going to argue with you about this, Melena, until you give in. Time in its
wisdom will bring you around to my way of thinking. Listen to me. Listen to me. You are only a
pampered little rich girl who flitted about from music lessons to dance lessons with neighborhood
children equally rich and stupid as you. Of course there’s cruelty. But Elphaba must learn who she is
and she must face down cruelty early. And there will be less of it than you expect.”
“Don’t play Nanny Goddess with me. I won’t have it.”
“Nanny is not giving up,” said Nanny, just as fiercely. “I have a long-range view of your
happiness as well as hers, and believe me, if you don’t give her the weapons and armor with which
she can defend herself against scorn, she’ll make your life miserable as hers will be miserable.”
“And the weapons and armor she’ll learn from the dirty urchins of Rush Margins?”
“Laughter. Fun. Teasing. Smiling.”
“Oh, please.”
“I’m not above blackmailing you about this, Melena said Nanny. “I can wander into Rush
Margins this afternoon and find where Frex is trying to hold his revival meeting and whisper a few
words to him. While Frex is busy cranking up the religious ardor of Rush Margins sluggards, would
he be interested in knowing what his wife is up to with Turtle Heart?”
“You are a miserable old fiend! You are a foul, unethical bully!” cried Melena.
Nanny grinned with pride. “No later than tomorrow,” she said, “we’ll go in tomorrow and get

her life started.”
In the morning a stiff, unforgiving wind galloped from the heights. It picked up old leaves and
the remains of failed crops and kitchen gardens. Nanny pulled a shawl across her rounded shoulders
and tugged a bonnet over her brow. Her eyes were full of marginal beasts; she kept turning to see a
slinking cat-thing or a vixen dissolve into clots of skeleton leaves and debris.
Nanny found a blackthorn staff as if to aid her over stones and ruts, but she hoped to be ready to
wield it against some hungry beast. “The land is dry and cold,” she observed, almost to herself.
“And so little rain! Of course the big beasts would be driven from the hills. Let’s walk together, no
running ahead, little green.”
They made their way in silence: Nanny fearful, Melena angry at having to miss her afternoon
dalliance, and Elphaba like a windup toy, one foot solidly in front of the other. The margins of the
lake had receded, and some of the crude docks were now walkways over pebble and drying
greenrot, with the water pulled back beyond their reach.
Gawnette’s was a dark stone cottage with a roof of moldering thatch. Because of a bad hip,
Gawnette was no good at hauling the fishing nets or at kneeling over the wasting vegetable gardens.
She had a mess of small children in various stages of undress, squawling and sulking and trotting
around the dirty yard in a little pack. She looked up as the minister’s family approached.
“Good day, and you must be Gawnette,” said Nanny brightly. She was pleased to open the gate
and be safely inside the garden, even of this hovel. “Brother Frexspar told us we would find you
here.”
“Sweet Lurline, what they say is true!” said Gawnette, making a holy sign against Elphaba. “I
thought it vicious lies, and here she is!”
The children had slowed to a walk. They were boys and girls, brown-faced and white, all of
them filthy, all of them keen on something new. Though they kept walking, playing some game of
endurance or make-believe, their eyes never left Elphaba.
“You know this is Melena-of course you do-and I am their Nanny,” said Nanny. “We’re pleased
to meet you, Gawnette.” She slid a glance at Melena and bit her upper lip and nodded.
“Very pleased, I’m sure,” said Melena stonily.
“And we need some advice, for you come well recommended,” said Nanny. “The little girl has
problems, and the best of our thinking just doesn’t seem to bring forth any good ideas.”
Gawnette leaned forward, suspicious.
“The child is green,” whispered Nanny confidentially. “You may not have noticed, being
attracted by her charm and warmth. Of course, we know the good people of Rush Margins wouldn’t
let a thing like that
bother them. But because she is green, she is shy. Look at her. Little frightened spring turtle. We
need to draw her out, make her happier, and we don’t know how.”
“She’s green all right,” said Gawnette. “No wonder useless Brother Frexspar retired from his
preaching for so long!” She threw back her head and laughed raucously, unkindly. “And he’s only
now had the nerve to take it up again! Well, that’s balls if ever I heard it!”
“Brother Frexspar,” interrupted Melena coldly, “reminds us of the scriptures-’No one knows
the color of a soul.’ Gawnette, he suggested I remind you of that very text.”
“Did he now,” mumbled Gawnette, chastised. “Well then, what do you want with me?”
“Let her play, let her learn, let her come here and be minded by you. You know more than we
do,” said Nanny.
The cunning old cow, thought Melena. She is trying that rarest of strategies, telling the truth, and
making it sound plausible. They sat down.
“I don’t know if they’d take to her,” said Gawnette, holding out a while. “And you know my hip

doesn’t let me hop up and stop them when they get going.”
“Let’s see. And of course there’d be some payment, some cash, Melena fully agrees,” said
Nanny. The barren vegetable plot had caught her attention. This was poverty. Nanny gave Elphaba a
push. “Well, go on in, child, and see what’s what.”
The girl didn’t budge, didn’t blink. The children came near to her. There were five boys and
two girls. “What an ugly pug,” said one of the older boys. He touched Elphaba on the shoulder.
“Play nicely now,” said Melena, about to leap up, but Nanny kept her hand out to say, Stay
down.
“Tag, let’s tag,” said the boy, “who’s the greenily?”
“Not it, not it!” The other children shrieked, and rushed in to
brush Elphaba with their hands, and then raced away. She stood for a
minute, unsure, her own hands down and clenched, and then she ran a
few steps, and stopped.
“That’s the way, healthful exercise,” said Nanny, nodding. “Gawnette, you’re a genius.”
“I know my chicks,” said Gawnette. “Don’t say I don’t.”
Herdlike, the children rushed in again, tapping and darting away, but the girl would not chase
them. So they neared her once more.
“Is it true you got a Quadling muckfrog staying with you too?” said Gawnette. “Is it true he only
eats grass and dung?”
“I beg your pardon!” cried Melena.
“That’s what they say, is it true?” said Gawnette.
“He’s a fine man.”
“But he’s a Quadling?”
“Nell-yes.”
“Don’t bring him around here then, they spread the plague,” said Gawnette.
“They spread no such thing,” snapped Melena.
“No throwing, Elphie dear,” called Nanny.
“I’m only saying what I hear. They say at night that Quadlings fall asleep and their souls climb
out through their mouths and go abroad.”
“Stupid people say a lot of stupid things.” Melena was curt and too loud. “I have never seen his
soul climb out of his mouth while he was sleeping, and I’ve had plenty of opportunity”
“Darling, no rocks,” shrilled Nanny. “None of the other children have rocks.”
“Now they do,” observed Gawnette.
“He is the most sensitive person I’ve ever met,” said Melena.
“Sensitive isn’t much use to a fishwife,” said Gawnette. “How about to a minister and a
minister’s wife?”
“Now there’s blood, how vexing,” said Nanny. “Children, let Elphie up so I can wipe that cut.
And I didn’t bring a rag. Gawnette?”
“Bleeding is good for them, makes them less hungry,” said Gawnette.
“I rate sensitive a good sight higher than stupid,” said Melena, seething.
“No biting,” said Gawnette to one of the little boys, and then, seeing Elphaba open her mouth to
retaliate, raised herself to her feet, bad hip or no, and screamed, “no biting, for the love of mercy!”
“Aren’t children divine?” said Nanny.
Every
second or third day Nanny took Elphaba by the hand and waddled the shadowy road to Rush
Margins. There Elphaba mingled with the greasy children under the eyes of sullen Gawnette. Frex
had moved out again (was it confidence or desperation?)-he was scaring miserable hamlets with his

frenzied beard and his collected opinions on faith. Gone for eight, ten days at a time. Melena
practiced piano arpeggios on a tuneless mock keyboard Frex had carved for her, to perfect scale.
Turtle Heart seemed to wilt and parch as autumn came on. Their afternoons of dalliance began
to lose the heat of urgency, and developed in warmth. Melena had always appreciated the attentions
of Frex, and been attentive to him, but somehow his body had not been as supple as Turtle Heart’s.
She drifted off to sleep with Turtle Heart’s mouth on one of her nipples and his hands-his big handsroaming like sentient pets. She imagined that Turtle Heart divided his body when her eyes were
closed; his mouth roamed, his cock rose and nudged and leaned, his breath was somewhere other
than his mouth, hissing elegantly into her ear, wordlessly, his arms were like stirrups.
Still she didn’t know him, not the way she knew Frex; she could not see through him as she
could most people. She put this down to his majestic bearing, but Nanny, ever watchful, remarked
one evening that it was just that his ways were the ways of a Quadling and Melena had never even
acknowledged that he came from a different culture than she did.
“Culture, what’s culture,” Melena said lazily. “People are people.”
“Don’t you remember your nursery rhymes?” Nanny put aside her sewing (with relief) and
recited.
“Boys study, girls know,
That’s the way that lessons go.
Boys learn, girls forget,
That’s the way of lessons yet.
Gillikinese are sharp as knives,
Munchkinlanders lead corny lives,
Glikkuns beat their ugly wives,
Winkies swarm in sticky hives.
But the Quadlings, Oh the Quadlings,
Slimy stupid curse-at-godlings,
Eat their young and bury their old
A day before their bodies get cold.
Give me an apple and I’ll say it again.
- “What do you know of him?” Nanny asked. “Is he married? Why did he leave Lower Slimepit
or wherever he comes from? Naturally, it’s not my place to ask such personal questions-“
“Since when did you ever know your place or keep it, either?”
“When Nanny leaves her place, believe me, you’ll know,” said Nanny.
One evening in early autumn, for fun they built up a fire in the yard. Frex was home and goodhumored, and Nanny was thinking of heading back to Colwen Grounds, which made Melena goodhumored too. Turtle Heart put together a supper, a distasteful goulash of small sour new apples and
cheese and bacon.
Frex was feeling expansive. The effect of that blasted tiktok contrivance, the Clock of the Time
Dragon, had been wearing off at last- thank the Unnamed God-and the graceless poor had been
turning out to hear Frex harangue them. A two-week mission at Three Dead Trees had been a
success. Frex had been rewarded with a small wallet of brass coins and barter tokens, and the glow
of devotion or even lust on the face of more than one penitent.
“Perhaps our time here is limited,” said Frex, sighing with contentment and clasping his arms
behind his head-the typical male response to happiness, thought Melena: to predict its demise. Her
husband went
on. “Perhaps the road from Rush Margins leads us on to higher things, Melena. Grander stations
in life.”

“Oh please,” she said. “My family rose from humble beginnings for nine generations, to
produce me with my ankles in the mud out here in the middle of nowhere. I don’t believe in higher
things.”
“I mean the lofty ambitions of the spirit. I don’t mean to storm the Emerald City and become
personal confessor to the Ozma Regent.”
“Why not put yourself forward to be confessor to Ozma Tippetarius?” Nanny asked. She could
see herself rising in courtly Emerald City society if Frex had such a position. “So what if the royal
baby is only, what, two years old? Three? So we have government by a male regent again. It’s only
for a limited engagement-like most male encounters. You’re young still-she’ll grow up-you’ll be
well-placed to influence policy.
“I don’t care about ministering to anyone in court, not even an Ozma the Fanatically Devout.”
Frex lit a sallowwood pipe. “My mission is to the downtrodden and humble.”
“Goodness should to travel to Quadling Country,” said Turtle Heart. “Downtrodden there.”
Turtle Heart didn’t often speak of his past, and Melena remembered Nanny’s gibe about her
lack of curiosity. She waved the pipe smoke away and said, “Why did you leave Ovvels anyway?”
“Horrors,” he said.
Elphaba, who had been hoping for ants to crawl across the grinding stone so she could mash
them with a rock, looked up across the shallow basin of the stone. The others waited for Turtle Heart
to go on. Melena’s heart lifted uneasily-she had a sudden premonition of things changing right here,
this very evening, this most splendid gentle night, things going awry just when they had managed to
settle down.
“What sort of horrors?” said Frex.
“I feel a chill. I’ll get a shawl,” said Melena.
“Or minister to Pastorius! The Ozma Regent! Why not, Frex?” Nanny said. “I’m sure with
Melena’s family connections you could twist an invitation-“
“Horrors,” said Elphaba.
It was her first word, and it was greeted with silence. Even the
moon, a lambent bowl among the trees, seemed to pause.
“Horrors?” Elphaba said again, looking around. Though her mouth was serious, her eyes
glowed; she had realized her own accomplishment. She was nearly two years old. The big sharp
teeth in her mouth could not keep her words locked inside her anymore. “Horrors,” she tried in a
whisper. “Horrors.”
“Come to Nanny, darling. Come sit on my lap and hush for a while.”
She obeyed, but sat forward, apart from Nanny’s cushiony bosom, allowing Nanny’s arms to
ring around her waist but no contact more than that. She stared at Turtle Heart and waited.
And Turtle Heart said in an awed voice, “Turtle Heart is thinking the child to speak for the first
time.”
“Yes,” said Frex, exhaling a ring of smoke, “and she’s asking about the horrors. Unless you
don’t care to tell
“Turtle Heart to say little. Turtle Heart to work in glass, and to leave words for the Goodness
and the Lady and the Nanny. And now for the Girl.”
“Say a little, though. Since you brought it up.”
Melena shivered; she hadn’t gone for the shawl. She could not move. She was heavy as stone.
“Workers from the Emerald City and other places, they to come to Quadling Country. They to
look and taste and sample the air, the water, the soil. They to plan the highway. Quadlings to know
this is wasted tune and wasted effort. They do not to listen to Quadling voices.”
“Quadlings aren’t road engineers, I suspect,” said Frex evenly.

“The country is delicate,” said Turtle Heart. “In Ovvels the houses to float between trees.
Crops to grow on small platforms hooked by ropes. Boys to dive in shallow water for vegetable
pearls. Too many trees and there is not enough light for crops and health. Too few trees and the
water rises and roots of plants floating on top cannot to stretch to soil. QuadlIng Country is poor
country but beauty rich. It only to support life by careful planning and cooperation.”
“So resistance to the Yellow Brick Road-“
“Is only part of the story. Quadlings cannot to convince road builders, who want to build up
dikes of mud and stone and to cut Quadling Country in pieces. Quadlings to argue, and to pray, and to
testify, and cannot to win with words.”
Frex held his pipe in his two hands and watched Turtle Heart speak. Frex was drawn to him;
Frex was always drawn to intensity.
“Quadlings consider to fight,” said Turtle Heart. “Because they think this is only the start. When
the builders to test soil and to sift water, they to learn of things Quadlings are smart for ever, but
Quadlings to keep still.”
“Things you know?”
“Turtle Heart to speak of rubies,” he said with a great sigh. “Rubies under the water. Red as
pigeon blood. Engineers to say: Red corundum in bands of crystalline limestone under swamp.
Quadlings to say: The blood of Oz.”
“Like the red glass you make?” said Melena.
“Ruby glass to come by adding gold chloride,” said Turtle Heart. “But Quadling Country to sit
atop real deposits of real rubies. And the news is sure to go to the Emerald City with the builders.
What to follow is horror upon horror.”
“How do you know?” snapped Melena.
“To look in glass,” said Turtle Heart, pointing to the roundel he had made as a toy for Elphaba,
“is to see the future, in blood and rubies.”
“I don’t believe in seeing the future. That smacks of the pleasure faith,” said Frex fiercely. “The
fatalism of the Time Dragon. Pfaah. No, the Unnamed God has an unnamed history for us, and
prophecy is merely guesswork and fear.”
“Fear and guesswork is enough to make Turtle Heart to leave Quadling Country, then,” said the
Quadling glassblower without apology. “Quadlings do not to call their religion a pleasure faith, but
they to listen to signs and to watch for messages. As the water to run red with rubies it will to run
with the blood of Quadlings.”
“Nonsense!” Frex fussed, red himself. “They need a good talking-to.”
“Besides, isn’t Pastorius a simpleton?” said Melena, who alone of them could claim an
informed opinion on the royal house. “What will he
do until Ozma is of age but ride the hunt, and eat Munchkinlander pastries, and fuck the odd
housemaid on the side?”
“The danger is a foreigner,” said Turtle Heart, “not a home-grown king or queen. The old
women, and the shamans, and the dying: They to see a stranger king, cruel and mighty.”
“What is the Ozma Regent doing, planning roadworks into that godforsaken mire anyway?”
Melena asked.
“Progress,” said Frex, “same as the Yellow Brick Road through Munchkinland. Progress and
control. The movement of troops. The regularization of taxes. Military protection.”
“Protection from whom?” said Melena.
“Ahh,” said Frex, “always the important question.”
“Ahh,” said Turtle Heart, almost in a whisper.
“So where are you going?” said Frex. “Not that you need leave here, of course. Melena loves

having you around. We all do.”
“Horrors,” said Elphaba.
“Hush now,” said Nanny.
“Lady is kind and Goodness is kind to Turtle Heart. Who did not mean to stay more than a day.
Turtle Heart was on his way to the Emerald City and to get lost. Turtle Heart to hope to beg audience
with Ozma-“
“Ozma Regent, now,” interjected Frex.
“-and to plead mercy for Quadling Country. And to warn of brutal stranger-“
“Horrors,” said Elphaba, clapping her hands together in delight.
“The child to remind Turtle Heart of his duties,” he said. “To talk of it brings duties back out of
the pain of the past. Turtle Heart to forget. But when words are to speak in the air, actions must to
follow.”
Melena glared hatefully at Nanny, who had dropped the girl on the ground and begun to busy
herself with collecting the supper dishes. See what comes of prying and nosiness, Nanny? See? Just
the dissolution of my only earthly happiness, that’s all. Melena turned her face from her horrid child,
who seemed to be smiling, or was that wincing? She looked at her husband with despair. Do
something, Frex!
“Perhaps this is the higher ambition we seek,” he was murmuring. “We should travel to
Quadling Country, Melena. We should leave the
luxury of Munchkinland and try ourselves in the fire of a truly needy situation.”
“The luxury of Munchkinland?” Melena’s voice was screechy.
“When the Unnamed God speaks through a lowly vessel,” began Frex, gesturing at Turtle Heart,
who was looking desperate again, “we can choose to hear or we can choose to harden our hearts-“
“Well, hear this, then,” said Melena, “I’m pregnant, Frex. I can’t travel. I can’t move. And with
a new infant to watch as well as Elphaba to raise, it’s too much to suggest tramping around
Mudland.”
After the stillness had lost some of its steam, she continued, “Well, I didn’t intend to tell you
like this.”
“Congratulations,” said Frex coldly.
“Horrors,” said Elphaba to her mother. “Horrors, horrors, horrors.”
“That’s enough thoughtless chatter for one night,” said Nanny, taking charge. “Melena, you will
catch a chill sitting out here. Summer nights are turning colder again. Come inside and let’s let that
be that.”
But Frex got himself up and went to kiss his wife. It was not clear to anyone whether he
suspected that Turtle Heart was the father, nor was it clear to Melena which one, her husband or her
lover, was the father. She didn’t actually care. She just didn’t want Turtle Heart to leave, and she
hated him fiercely for being so suddenly riven with moral feeling for his miserable people.
Frex and Turtle Heart conversed in low voices that Melena could not make out. They sat by the
fire with their heads low together, and Frex had his arm on Turtle Heart’s shaking shoulders. Nanny
readied Elphaba for bed, left her outside with the men, and came to sit on Melena’s bed with a glass
of hot milk on a tray and a small bowl of medicinal capsules.
“Well, I knew this was coming,” said Nanny calmly. “Drink the milk, dear, and stop sniveling.
You’re behaving like a child again. How long have you known?”
“Oh, six weeks,” said Melena. “I don’t want milk, Nanny, I want my wine.”
“You’ll drink milk. No more wine till the baby’s born. You want another disaster?”
“Drinking wine doesn’t change the skin color of embryos,” said Melena. “I may be a dolt but I
know that much about biology.”

“It’s bad for your frame of mind, nothing more and nothing less. Drink the milk and swallow
one of these capsules.”
“what for?
“I did what I told you I d do said Nanny in a conspiratonal voice Last fall I poked around the
Lower Quarter of our fair capital on your
half-“
The young woman was suddenly engaged Nanny you didn’t t’ How .-r! Weren’t you terrified?”
“Of course I was. But Nanny loves you, however stupid you are. I found a store marked with the
secret insignia of the alchemist’s trade.” She wrinkled her nose in recollection of the smell of rotting
ginger and cat piss. “I sat down with a saucy-looking old biddy from Shiz, a crone named Yackle,
and drank the tea and upended the cup so she could read the leaves. Yackle could barely see her own
hand, much less read the picture.”
“A real professional,” Melena said dryly.
“Your husband doesn’t believe in predictions, so keep your voice down. Anyway, I explained
about the greenness of your first child, and the difficulty of knowing exactly why it had happened.
We don’t want a recurrence, I said. So Yackle ground up some herbs and minerals, and toasted it
with oil of gomba, and said some pagan prayers and for all I know she spit in it, I didn’t watch too
closely. But I paid for a nine months’ supply, to be begun as soon as you’re sure you’ve conceived.
We’re a month late maybe, but this’ll be better than nothing. I have supreme confidence in this
woman, Melena, and you should too.”
“Why should I?” said Melena, swallowing the first of nine capsules. It tasted like boiled
marrow.
“Because Yackle predicted greatness for your children,” said Nanny. “She said Elphaba will
be more than you credit, and your second will follow suit. She said not to give up on your life. She
said history waits to be written, and this family has a part in it.”
“What does she say about my lover?”
“You are a pest,” said Nanny. “She said to rest and not to worry. She gives her blessing. She is
a filthy whore but she knows what she’s talking about.” Nanny didn’t mention that Yackle was
certain the next child would be a girl too. There was too much chance Melena would try to abort her,
and Yackle sounded quite sure that history belonged to two sisters, not a single girl.
“And you got home safely? Did anyone suspect?”
“Who would suspect innocent old Nanny of trading in illegal substances in the Lower Quarter?”
laughed Nanny. “I do my knitting and mind my own business. Now go to sleep, my love. Nix to the
wine for the next few months, and stay the course with this medicine, and we’ll have for you and
Frex a decent, healthy child, which will provide no end of recovery for your marriage.”
“My marriage is perfectly fine,” said Melena, snuggling down under the covers-the capsule had
a kick, but she didn’t want Nanny to know-“as long as we don’t go wading off into the muddy
sunset.”
“The sun sets in the west, not in the south,” said Nanny soothingly. “It was a masterly stroke to
bring up the pregnancy tonight, my dear. I wouldn’t come to visit you if you went paddling off into
Quadling Country, by the way. I’m fifty years old this year, you know. There are some things Nanny
is really too old to do.”
“Well nobody better go anywhere,” said Melena, and began to fall asleep.
Nanny, pleased with herself, glanced out the window again as she prepared to retire. Frex and
Turtle Heart were still deep in conversation. Nanny was sharper than she let on; she had seen Turtle
Heart’s face when he was remembering the threat to his people. It had opened like a hen’s egg, and
the truth had fluttered and wobbled out of it just as naive as a yellow chick. And as fragile. No

wonder Frex was sitting nearer to the beleaguered Quadling than Nanny thought was altogether
decent. But there seemed no end of oddity to this family.
“Send the girl in so I can put her down,” she called from the window, partly to interrupt their
intimacy.
Frex looked around. “She’s in, isn’t she?”
Nanny glanced. The child was not given to hiding games, neither here nor with the brats in the
village. “No, isn’t she with you?”
The men turned and looked. Nanny thought she saw a blur of movement in the blue shadows of
the wild yew. She stood up and held on to the window ledge. “Well, find her. It’s the prowling
hour.”
“There’s nothing here, Nanny, it’s your overactive imagination,”
drawled Frex, but the men were up quickly, and looking around.
“Melena, dear, don’t sleep yet; do you know where Elphaba is? Did
you see her wander off?” said Nanny.
Melena struggled to lift herself to one elbow. She stared through her hair and her inebriation.
“What are you on about?” she asked in a slur, “who is wandering off?”
“Elphaba,” Nanny said. “Come on, you better get up. Where could be. Where could she be.”
She started to help Melena up, but it was
happening too slowly, and Nanny’s heart was beginning to beat fast. She
fixed Melena’s hands to the bedposts, saying, “Now come on, Melena, this is not good,” and
she reached for her blackthorn staff.
“Who?” said Melena. “Who’s lost?”
The men were calling in the purple gloaming. “Fabala! Elphaba! Elphie! Little frog!” They
circled out away from the yard, away from the dying embers of the dinner fire, peering and hitting at
the lower branches of bushes. “Little snake! Lizard girl! Where are you?”
“It’s the thing, the thing has come down from the hills, whatever it is! cried Nanny.
“There’s no thing, you old fool,” said Frex, but he leaped more and more vigorously from rock
to rock behind the lodge, smacking branches aside. Turtle Heart stood still, his hands out to the sky,
as if trying to receive the faint light of the first stars into his palms.
“Is it Elphaba,” called Melena from the door, finally focusing, and stepping forward in her
nightgown. “Is the child gone?”
“She’s wandered off, she’s been taken,” said Nanny fiercely, “these two idiots were flirting
like schoolgirls, and the beast from the hills is abroad!”
Melena called, her words mounting in pitch and terror, “Elphaba! Elphaba, you listen to me!
Come here this instant! Elphaba!”
The wind alone answered.
“She is not far,” said Turtle Heart after a moment. In the deepening dark he was almost
invisible while Melena in her white poplin glowed like an angel, as if lit from within. “She is not
far, she just is not here.”
“What the devil do you mean,” Nanny said, weeping, “with your riddles and your games?”
Turtle Heart turned. Frex had come back to him, to throw an arm around him and hold him up,
and Melena came forward to his other side.
He sagged for a minute, as if fainting; Melena cried out in fright. But Turtle Heart straightened
up, and began to move forward, and they headed toward the lake.
“Not the lake, not that girl, she can’t abide water, you know that,” called Nanny, but she was
rushing forward now, using her staff to feel the ground ahead of her so she wouldn’t stumble.
This is the end, thought Melena. Her brain was too foggy to think anything else, and she said it

again and again, as if to prevent it from being true.
This is the beginning, thought Frex, but of what?
“She is not far, she is not here,” said Turtle Heart again.
“Punishment for your wicked ways, you two-faced hedonists,” Nanny said.
The ground sloped toward the still, receded margin of the lake. First at their feet, then at their
waists and higher, the beached dock rose, like a bridge to nowhere, ending In air.
Beneath the dock in the dry shadows there were eyes.
“Oh, sweet Lurline,” whispered Nanny.
Elphaba was sitting under the dock wIth the looking glass that Turtle Heart had made. She held
it in two hands, and stared at it with one eye closed. She peered, she squinted; her open eye was
distant and hollow.
Reflection from the starlight off the water, thought Frex, hoped Frex, but he knew the bright
vacant eye was not lit by starlight.
“Horrors,” murmured Elphaba.
Turtle Heart tumbled to his knees. “She sees him coming,” he said thickly, “she sees him to
come; he is to come from the air; is arriving. A balloon from the sky, the color of a bubble of blood:
a huge crimson globe, a ruby globe: he falls from the sky. The Regent is fallen. The House of Ozma
is fallen. The Clock was right. A minute to judgment.”
He fell over, almost into Elphaba’s small lap. She didn’t seem to notice him. Behind her was a
low growl. There was a beast, a feiltop tiger, or some strange hybrid of tiger and dragon, with
glowing orangey eyes. Elphaba was sitting in its folded forearms as if on a throne.
“Horrors,” she said again, looking without binocular vision, staring at the glass in which her
parents and Nanny could make out nothing but darkness. “Horrors.”

Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West

Book 2 - Gillikin
Wittica, Settica, Wiccas and Turning, Red Sand, Dixxi House, change at Dixxi House for Shin;
stay aboard this coach for all points East; Tenniken, Brox Hall, and all destinations to Traum”-the
conductor paused to catch his breath-“next stop Wittica, Wittica next!”
Galinda clutched her parcel of clothes to her breast. The old goat who sprawled on the seat
across from her was missing the Wittica stop. She was glad that trains made passengers sleepy. She
didn’t want to keep avoiding his eye. At the last minute before she was to board the train, her
minder, Ama Clutch, had stepped on a rusty nail and, terrified of the frozen-face syndrome, had
begged permission to go to the nearest surgery for medicines and calming spells. “I can surely get
myself to Shiz alone,” Galinda had said coldly, “don’t bother with me, Ama Clutch.” And Ama
Clutch hadn’t. Galinda hoped that Ama Clutch would suffer a little frozenness of jaw before being
well enough to show up in Shin and chaperone Galinda through whatever was to come.
Her own chin was set, she believed, to imply a worldly boredom with train travel. In fact she
had never been more than a day’s carriage ride away from her family home in the little market town
of Frottica. The railway line, laid down a decade ago, had meant that old dairy farms were being cut
up for country estates for the merchants and manufacturers of Shiz. But Galinda’s family continued to
prefer rural Gilhikin, with its fox haunts, its dripping dells, its secluded ancient pagan temples to
Lurline. To them, Shin was a distant urban threat, and even the convenience of rail transportation
hadn’t tempted them to risk all its complications, curiosities, and evil ways.
Galinda didn’t see the verdant world through the glass of the carriage; she saw her own
reflection instead. She had the nearsightedness of
youth. She reasoned that because she was beautiful she was significant, though what she
signified, and to whom, was not clear to her yet. The sway of her head made her creamy ringlets
swing, catching the light, like so many jostling stacks of coins. Her lips were perfect, as pouted as an
opening maya flower, and colored as brilliantly red. Her green traveling gown with its inset panels
of ochre musset suggested wealth, while the black shawl draping just so about the shoulders was a
nod to her academic inclinations. She was, after all, on her way to Shin because she was smart.
But there was more than one way to be smart.
She was seventeen. The whole town of Frottica had seen her off. The first girl from the Pertha
Hills to be accepted at Shin! She had written well in the entrance exams, a meditation on Learning
Ethics from the Natural World. (”Do Flowers Regret Being Plucked for a Bouquet? Do the Rains
Practice Abstinence? Can Animals Really Choose to Be Good? Or: A Moral Philosophy of
Springtime.”) She had quoted excessively from the Oziad, and her rapturous prose had captivated the
board of examiners. A three-year fellowship to Crage Hall. It wasn’t one of the better collegesthose were still closed to female students. But it was Shiz University.
Her companion in the compartment, waking up when the conductor came back through, stretched
his heels as he yawned. “Would you be so kind as to reach my ticket, it’s in the overhead,” he said.
Galinda stood and found the ticket, aware that the bearded old thing was eyeing her comely figure.
“Here you are,” she said, and he answered, “Not to me, dearie, to the conductor. Without opposable
thumbs, I have no hope of managing such a tiny piece of cardboard.”
The conductor punched the ticket, and said, “You’re the rare beast that can afford to travel first
class.”
“Oh,” said the goat, “I object to the term beast. But the laws still allow my traveling in first
class, I presume?”
“Money’s money,” said the conductor, without ill will, punching Galinda’s ticket and returning

it to her.
“No, money’s not money,” said the goat, “not when my ticket cost double what the young lady’s
did. In this case, money is a visa. I happen to have it.”
“Going up to Shin, are you?” said the conductor to Galinda, ignoring the goat’s remark. “I can
tell by that academic shawl.”
“Oh well, it’s something to do,” said Galinda. She didn’t care to talk to conductors. But when
he continued along down the carriage, Galinda found that she liked even less the baleful look that the
goat was giving her.
“Do you expect to learn anything at Shin?” he asked.
“I have already learned not to speak to strangers.”
“Then I will introduce myself and we will be strangers no longer. I am Dillamond.”
“I am disinclined to know you.”
“I am a Fellow of Shin University, on the Faculty of Biological Arts.”
You are a shabby dresser, even for a goat, Galinda thought. Money isn’t everything. “Then I
must overcome my natural shyness. My name is Galinda. I am of the Arduenna Clan on my mother’s
side.”
“Let me be the first to welcome you to Shin, Glinda. This is your first year?”
“Please, it is Galinda. The proper old Gillikinese pronunciation, if you don’t mind.” She could
not bring herself to call him sir. Not with that horrid goatee and the tatty waistcoat that looked cut
from some public house carpet.
“I wonder what you think of the Wizard’s proposed Banns on travel?” The goat’s eyes were
buttery and warm, and frightening. Galinda had never heard of any Banns. She said as much.
Dillamond-was it Doctor Dillamond?-explained in a conversational tone that the Wizard had
thoughts of restricting Animal travel on public conveyances except in designated transports. Galinda
replied that animals had always enjoyed separate services. “No, I am speaking of Animals,” said
Dillamond. “Those with a spirit.”
“Oh, those,” said Galinda crudely. “Well, I don’t see the problem.”
“My, my,” said Dillamond. “Don’t you indeed?” The goatee quivered; he was irritated. He
began to hector her about Animal Rights. As things now stood, his own ancient mother couldn’t
afford to travel first class, and would have to ride in a pen when she wanted to visit him in Shin. If
the Wizard’s Banns went through the Hall of Approval, as they were likely to do, the goat himself
would be required by law to give up the privileges he had earned through years of study, training,
and saving. “Is that right for a creature with a spirit?” he said. “From here to there, there to here, in a
pen?”
“I quite agree, travel is so broadening,” said Galinda. They endured the rest of the trip,
including the change across the platform at Dixxi House, in a frosty silence.
Seeing her fright at the size and bustle of the terminus at Shin, Dillamond took pity and offered
to engage a carriage to take her to Crage Hall. She followed him, looking as unmortified as she could
manage. Her luggage came behind, on the backs of a couple of porters.
Shin! She tried not to gawp. Everyone hustling on business, laughing and hurrying and kissing,
dodging carriages, while the buildings of Railway Square, brownstone and bluestone and covered
with vine and moss, steamed softly in the sunlight. The animals-and the Animals! She had scarcely
ever come across even the odd chicken squawking philosophically in Frottica-but here was a quartet
of tsebras at an outdoor cafe, dressed flashily in black-and-white satin stripes on the bias to their
inborn design; and an elephant on its hind legs directing traffic; and a tiger dressed up in some sort of
exotic religious garb, a kind of monk or maunt or nun or something. Yes, yes, it was Tsebras, and
Elephant, and Tiger, and she supposed Goat. She would have to get used to enunciating the capital

letters or else she would show off her country origins.
Mercifully, Dillamond found her a carriage with a human driver, and directed him to Crage
Hall and paid him in advance, for which Galinda had to come up with a weak smile of appreciation.
“Our paths will cross again,” said Dillamond, gallantly if curtly, as if putting forth a prophecy, and
he disappeared as the carriage jolted forward. Galinda sank back into the cushions. She began to be
sorry that Ama Clutch had punctured her foot with a nail.
Crage Hall was only twenty minutes from Railway Square. Behind its own bluestone walls, the
complex was set with large watery-glass windows in lancet formation. A tessellation of quatrefoils
and blind multifoils ran riot at the roofline. The appreciation of architecture was Galinda’s private
passion, and she pored over the features she could identify, although the vines and flatmoss fudged
many of the finer details of the buildings. Too soon she was whisked inside.
The Headmistress of Crage Hall, a fish-faced upper-class Gillikinese woman wearing a lot of
cloisonne bangles, was greeting new arrivals in
the atrium. The Head eschewed the drabness of professional women’s dress that Galinda had
expected. Instead the imposing woman was bedecked in a currant-colored gown with patterns of
black jet swirling over the bodice like dynamic markings on sheet music. “I am Madame Morrible,”
she said to Galinda. Her voice was basso profundo, her grip crippling, her posture military, her
earrings like holiday tree ornaments. “Flourishes all around, and a quick cup of tea in the parlor.
Then we’ll assemble in the Main Hall and sort you out as to roomies.”
The parlor was filled with pretty young women, all wearing green or blue and trailing black
shawls like exhausted shadows behind them. Galinda was glad for the natural advantages of her
flaxen hair, and stood by a window so the light could dazzle itself off her curls. She hardly sipped
the tea. In a side room, the attendant Amas were serving themselves from a metal urn, and laughing
and yakking already as if they were old friends from the same village. It was somewhat grotesque,
all those dumpy women smiling at each other, making marketplace noise.
Galinda hadn’t read the fine print very closely. She hadn’t realized there would be a need for
“roomies.” Or perhaps had her parents paid extra so she could have a private room? And where
would Ama Clutch stay? Looking about her, she could tell that some of these dollies came from
families much better off than hers. The pearls and diamonds on them! Galinda was glad she had
chosen a simple silver collar with mettanite struts. There was something vulgar about traveling in
jewels. As she realized this truth, she codified it into a saying. At the earliest perfect opportunity she
would bring it out as proof of her having opinions-and of having traveled. “The overdressed traveler
betrays more interest in being seen than in seeing,” she murmured, trying it out, “while the true
traveler knows that the novel world about her serves as the most appropriate accessory.” Good, very
good.
Madame Morrible counted heads, gripped a cup of tea, and shooed everyone into the Main
Hall. There Galinda learned that allowing Ama Clutch to go looking for a surgery had been a
colossal mistake. Apparently all that chatter among Amas hadn’t been frivolous and social. They had
been instructed to sort out among them whose young lady would room with whose. The Amas had
been relied upon to get to the nub of the matter more quickly than the students themselves. No one
had spoken for Galinda-she had gone unrepresented!
After the forgettable welcome remarks, as couple by couple the students and Amas left to locate
their lodgings and settle in, Galinda found herself growing pale with embarrassment. Ama Clutch,
the old fool, would have fixed her up nicely with someone just a notch or two above on the social
ladder! Near enough that Galinda would suffer no shame, and above enough to make it worth the
while of socializing. But now, all the better young misses were linked together. Diamond to
diamond, emerald to emerald, for all she could tell! As the room began to empty, Galinda wondered

if she shouldn’t go up and interrupt Madame Morrible and explain the problem. Galinda was, after
all, an Arduenna of the Uplands, at least on one side. It was a hideous accident. Her eyes teared up.
But she hadn’t the nerve. She stayed perched on the edge of the fragile, stupid chair. Except for
her, all the center of the room had cleared out now, and the shyer, more useless girls were left,
around the edges, in the shadows. Surrounded by an obstacle course of empty gilded chairs, Galinda
alone sat like an unclaimed valise.
“Now the rest of you are here without Amas, I understand,” said Madame Momble, a bit
sniffily. “Since we require chaperonage, I will assign each of you to one of the three dormitories for
freshers, which sleep fifteen girls each. There is no social stigma to the dormitory, I might add. None
at all.” But she was lying, and not even convincingly.
Galinda finally stood up. “Please, Madame Morrible, there is a mistake. I am Galinda of the
Arduennas. My Ama took a nail in her foot on the voyage and was detained for a day or two. I am not
in the dormitory class, you see.”
“How sad for you,” said Madame Morrible, smiling. “I’m sure your Ama will be pleased to be
a chaperone in, shall we say, the Pink Dormitory? Fourth floor on the right-“
“No, no, she would not,” interrupted Galinda, quite bravely. “I am not here to sleep in a
dormitory, Pink or otherwise. You have misunderstood.”
“I have not misunderstood, Miss Galinda,” said Madame Morrible, growing even more fishlike
as her eyes began to bulge. “There is accident, there is tardiness, there are decisions to be made. As
you were not equipped, through your Ama, to make your own decision, I am empowered to make it
for you. Please, we are busy and I must name the other girls who will join you in the Pink
Dormitory-“
“I would have a private word with you, Madame,” said Galinda in desperation. “For myself,
dormitory partners or a single roomie, it is no matter. But I cannot recommend that you ask my Ama
to oversee other girls, for reasons I may not say in public.” She was lying as fast as she could, and
better than Madame Morrible, who seemed at least intrigued.
“You strike me as impertinent, Miss Galinda,” she said mildly.
“I have not yet struck you, Madame Morrible.” Galinda delivered the daring line with her
sweetest smile.
Madame Morrible chose to laugh, thank Lurline! “A spark of spunk! You may come to my
chambers this evening and tell me the story of your Ama’s shortcomings, as I should know them. But
I will compromise with you, Miss Galinda. Unless you object, I will have to ask your Ama to
chaperone both you and another girl, one who comes without an Ama. For you see, all the other
students with Amas are already paired off, and you are the odd one out.”
“I am certain my Ama could manage that, at least.”
Madame Morrible scanned the page of names, and said, “Very well. To join Miss Galinda of
the Arduennas in a double room-shall I invite the Thropp Third Descending, of Nest Hardings,
Elphaba?”
No one stirred. “Elphaba?” said Madame Morrible again, adjusting her bangles and pressing
two fingers at the bottom of her throat.
The girl was in the back of the room, a pauper in a red dress with gaudy fretwork, and in
clumpy, old-people’s boots. At first Galinda thought what she saw was some trick of the light, a
reflection off the adjacent buildings covered in vines and flatmoss. But as Elphaba moved forward,
lugging her own carpetbags, it became obvious that she was green. A hatchet-faced girl with
putrescent green skin and long, foreign-looking black hair. “A Munchkinlander by birth, though with
many childhood years spent in Quadling Country,” read Madame Morrible from her notes. “How
fascinating for us all, Miss Elphaba. We shall look forward to hearing tales of exotic climes and

times. Miss Galinda and Miss Elphaba, here are your keys. You may take room twenty-two on the
second floor.”
She smiled broadly at Galinda as the girls came forward. “Travel is so broadening,” she
intoned. Galinda started, the curse of her own words lobbed hack at her. She curtseyed and fled.
Elphaba, eyes on the floor, followed behind.
By the time Ama Clutch arrived the next day, her foot bandaged to three times its natural sine,
Elphaba had already unpacked her few belongings. They hung raglike on hooks in the cupboard: thin,
shapeless shifts, shamed into a corner by the fulsome hoops and starched bustles and padded
shoulders and cushioned elbows of Galinda’s wardrobe. “I am happy as cheese to be your Ama too,
don’t matter to me,” said Ama Clutch, smiling broadly in Elphaba’s direction, before Galinda had a
chance to get Ama Clutch alone and demand that her minder refuse. “Of course my Papa is paying
you to be my Ama,” said Galinda meaningfully, but Ama Clutch answered, “Not as much as all that,
duckie, not as much as all that. I can be making up my own mind.”
“Ama,” said Galinda when Elphaba had left to use the mildewy facilities, “Ama, are you blind?
That Munchkinlander girl is green.”
“Odd, isn’t it? I thought all Munchkinlanders were tiny. She’s a proper height, though. I guess
they come in a variety of sizes. Oh, are you bothered by the green? Well, it might do you some good,
if you let it. If you let it. You affect worldly airs, Galinda, but you don’t know the world yet. I think
it’s a lark. Why not? Why ever not?”
“It’s not yours to organize my education, worldly or otherwise, Ama Clutch!”
“No, my dear,” said Ama Clutch, “you’ve made this mess all by your lonesome. I’m merely
being of service.”
So Galinda was stuck. Last night’s brief interview with Madame Morrible had not provided
any escape route, either. Galinda had arrived promptly, in a dotted morpheline skirt with lace
bodice, a vision, as she’d said to herself, in nocturnal purples and midnight blues. Madame Morrible
bade her enter the reception room, in which a small cluster of leather chairs and a settee were drawn
up before an unnecessary fire. The Head poured mint tea and offered crystallized ginger wrapped in
pearlfruit leaves. She indicated a chair for Galinda, but herself stood by the mantelpiece like a big
game hunter.
In the best tradition of the upper-class savoring its luxuries, they sipped and nibbled in silence
at first. This gave Galinda the chance to observe that Madame Morrible was fishlike not merely in
countenance but in dress: Her loose-fitting cream foxille flowed like a huge airy bladder from the
high frilled neckline to the knees, where it was tightly gathered and dropped straight to the floor,
hugging the calves and ankles in neat, anticlimactic pleats. She looked for all the world like a giant
carp in a men’s club. And a dull, bored carp at that, not even a sentient Carp.
“Now your Ama, my dear. The reason she is incapable of supervising a dormitory. I’m all
ears.”
Galinda had taken all afternoon to prepare. “You see, Madame Head, I didn’t like to say it
publicly. But Ama Clutch suffered a terrible fall last summer when we were picnicking in the Pertha
Hills. She reached for a handful of wild mountain thyme and went pitching over a cliff. She lay for
weeks in a coma, and when she emerged she had no memory of the accident at all. If you asked her
about it, she wouldn’t even know what you meant. Amnesia by trauma.”
“I see. How very tiresome for you. But why does this make her unequal to the job I proposed?”
“She has become addled. Ama Clutch, on occasion, gets confused as to what has Life and what
doesn’t. She will sit and talk to, oh, say, a chair, and then relate its history back to us. Its aspirations,
its reservations-“
“Its joys, its sorrows,” said Madame Morrible. “How truly novel. The emotional life of

furniture. I never.”
“But, silly as this is, and a cause for hours of merriment, the corollary ailment is more alarming.
Madame Morrible, I must tell you that Ama Clutch sometimes forgets that people are alive. Or
animals.” Galinda paused, then added, “Or Animals, even.”
“Go on, my dear.”
“It is all right for me, because Ama has been my Ama all my life, and I know her. I know her
ways. But she can sometimes forget a person is there, or needs her, or is a person. Once she cleaned
a wardrobe and tipped it over onto the houseboy, breaking his back. She didn’t register his
screaming right there, right at her feet. She folded the nightclothes and had a conversation with my
mother’s evening gown, asking it all sorts of impertinent questions.”
“What a fascinating condition,” said Madame Morrible. “And how vexing for you, really.”
“I couldn’t have allowed her to accept responsibility for fourteen other girls,” Galinda
confided. “For me, alone, there is no problem. I love the foolish old woman, in a way.”
Madame Morrible had said, “But what of your roomie? Can you jeopardize her well-being?”
“I didn’t ask for her.” Galinda looked the Head in her glazed, unblinking eye. “The poor
Munchkinlander appears to be used to a life of distress. Either she will adjust or, I assume, she will
petition you to be removed from my room. Unless, of course, you feel it your duty to move her for her
own safety.”
Madame Morrible said, “I suppose if Miss Elphaba cannot live with what we give her, she will
leave Crage Hall on her own accord. Don’t you think?”
It was the we in what we give her: Madame Morrible was binding Galinda into a campaign.
They both knew it. Galinda struggled to maintain her autonomy. But she was only seventeen, and she
had suffered that same indignity of exclusion in the Main Hall just hours ago. She didn’t know what
Madame Morrible could have against Elphaba except the looks of her. But there was something,
there was clearly something. What was it? She sensed it to be wrong somehow. “Don’t you think,
dear?” said Madame Morrible, bowing a bit forward like a fish arching in a slow-motion leap.
“Well, of course, we must do what we can,” said Galinda, as vaguely as possible. But she
seemed the fish, and caught on a most clever hook.
Out of the shadows of the reception room came a small tiktok thing, about three feet high, made
of burnished bronze, with an identifying plate screwed into its front. The plate said Smith and
Tinker’s Mechanical Man, in ornate script. The clockwork servant collected the empty teacups and
whirred itself away. Galinda didn’t know how long it had been there, or what it had heard, but she
had never liked tiktok creatures.
Elphaba had a bad case of what Galinnda called the reading sulks. Elphaba didn’t curl up-she
was too bony to curl-but she jackknifed herself nearer to herself, her funny pointed green nose poking
in the moldy leaves of a book. She played with her hair while she read, coiling it up and down
around fingers so thin and twiglike as to seem almost exoskeletal. Her hair never curled no matter
how often Elphaba twined it around her
hands. It was beautiful hair, in an odd, awful way, with a shine like the pelt of a healthy
giltebeast. Black silk. Coffee spun into threads. Night rain. Galinda, not given to metaphor on the
whole, found Elphaba’s hair entrancing, the more so because the girl was otherwise so ugly.
They didn’t talk much. Galinda was too busy forging alliances with the better girls who had
been her rightful roomie prospects. No doubt she could switch rooms at half-term, or at any rate next
fall. So Galinda left Elphaba alone, and she flew down the hall to gossip with her new friends.
Milla, Pfannee, Shenshen. Just as in children’s books about boarding school, each new friend was
wealthier than the one before.
At first Galinda didn’t mention who her roomie was. And Elphaba showed no sign of expecting

Galinda’s company, which was a relief. But the gossip had to start sooner or later. The first wave of
discussion about Elphaba concerned her wardrobe and her evident poverty, as if her classmates
were above noticing her sickly and sickening color. “Someone told me that Madame Head had said
Miss Elphaba was the Thropp Third Descending from Nest Hardings,” said Pfannee, who was also a
Munchkinlander, but one of diminutive stock, not full-size like the Thropp family. “The Thropp are
highly regarded in Nest Hardings and even beyond. The Eminent Thropp put together the area’s
militia and tore up the Yellow Brick Road that the Omar Regent had been laying in when we all
were small-before the Glorious Revolution. There was no callousness in the Eminent Thropp or his
wife or family, including his granddaughter Elena, you can be assured.” By callousness, of course,
Pfannee meant greenness.
“But how the mighty have fallen! She’s as ragged as a gypsy,” observed Milla. “Have you ever
seen such tawdry dresses? Her Ama should be sacked.”
“She has no Ama, I think,” said Shenshen. Galinda, who knew for sure, said nothing.
“They said she had spent time in Quadling Country,” Milla went on. “Perhaps her family had
been exiled as criminals?”
“Or they were speculators in rubies,” said Shenshen.
“Then where’s the wealth?” snapped Milla. “Speculators in rubies did very well, Miss
Shenshen. Our Miss Elphaba doesn’t have two barter tokens to rub together and call her own.”
“Perhaps it’s a kind of religious calling? A chosen poverty?” suggested Pfannee, and at this
nonsense they all threw back their heads and chortled.
Elphaba, coming into the buttery for a cup of coffee, caused them to escalate into louder roars
of laughter. Elphaba did not look over at them, but every other student did glance their way, each girl
longing to be included in the jollity, which made the four new friends feel just fine.
Galinda was slow coming to terms with actual learning. She had considered her admission into
Shin University as a sort of testimony to her brilliance, and believed that she would adorn the halls
of learning with her beauty and occasional clever sayings. She supposed, glumly, that she had meant
to be a sort of living marble bust: This is Youthful Intelligence; admire Her. Isn’t She lovely?
It hadn’t actually dawned on Galinda that there was more to learn, and furthermore that she was
expected to do it. The education all the new girls chiefly wanted, of course, had nothing to do with
Madame Momble or the prattling Animals at lecterns and on daises. What the girls wanted wasn’t
equations, or quotations, or orations-they wanted Shin itself. City life. The broad, offensive panoply
of life and Life, seamlessly intertwined.
Galinda was relieved that Elphaba never took part in the outings the Amas organized. Since
they often stopped at a lunchroom for a modest meal, the weekly brigade became known informally
as the Chowder and Marching Society. The university district was aflame with autumn color, not just
of dying leaves, but also of fraternity pennants, fluttering from rooftop and spire.
Galinda soaked up the architecture of Shin. Here and there, mostly in protected College yards
and side streets, the oldest surviving domestic architecture still leaned, ancient wattle-and-daub and
exposed stud framing held up like paralytic grannies by stronger, newer relatives on either side.
Then, in dizzying succession, unparalleled glories: Bloodstone Medieval, Merthic (both Least and
the more fantastical Late), Gallantine with its symmetries and restraint, Gallantine Reformed with all
those festering ogees and broken pediments, Bluestone Revival, Imperial Bombast, and Industrial
Modern, or, as the critics in the liberal press put it, High
Hostile Crudstyle, the form propagated by the modernity-minded Wizard of Oz.
Besides architecture, the excitement was tame, to be sure. On one notable occasion, which no
Crage Hall girl present ever forgot, the senior boys from Three Queens College across the canal, for
a lark and a dare, had tanked themselves up with beer in the middle of the afternoon, had hired a

White Bear violinist, and had gone down to dance together under the willow trees, wearing nothing
but their clinging cotton drawers and their school scarves, It was deliciously pagan, as they had set
an old chipped statue of Lurline the Fairy Queen on a three-legged stool, and she seemed to smile at
their loose-limbed gaiety. The girls and the Amas pretended shock, but poorly; they lingered,
watching, until horrified proctors from Three Queens came rushing out to round the revelers up. Near
nudity was one thing, but public Lurlinism-even as a joke-bordered on being intolerably retrograde,
even royalist. And that did not do in the Wizard’s reign.
One Saturday evening, when the Amas had a rare night off and had taken themselves in to a
pleasure faith meeting in Ticknor Circus, Galinda had a brief and silly squabble with Pfanriee and
Shenshen, after which she retired early to her bedchamber, complaining of a headache. Elphaba was
sitting up in her bed with the commissary brown blanket tucked around her. She was hunched
forward over a book, as usual, and her hair hung down like brackets on either side of her face. She
looked to Galinda like one of those etchings-the natural history books were full of them-of odd
Winkie mountain women who hide their strangeness with a shawl over the head. Elphaba was
munching on the pips of an apple, having eaten all the rest of it. “Well, you look cozy enough, Miss
Elphaba,” said Galinda, challengingly. In three months it was the first social remark she had
managed to make to her roomie.
“Looks are only looks,” said Elphaba, not looking up.
“Will it break your concentration if I sit in front of the fire?”
“You cast a shadow if you sit just there.”
“Oh, sorry,” said Galinda, and moved. “Mustn’t cast shadows, must we, when urgent words are
waiting to be read?”
Elphaba was back in her book already, and didn’t answer.
“What the dickens are you reading, night and day?”
It seemed as if Elphaba were coming up for air from a still, isolated pool. “While I don’t read
the same thing every day, you know, tonight I am reading some of the speeches of the early unionist
fathers.”
“Why ever would anyone want to do that?”
“I don’t know. I don’t even know if I want to read them. I’m just reading them.”
“But why? Miss Elphaba the Delirious, why, why?”
Elphaba looked up at Galinda and smiled. “Elphaba the Delirious. I like it.”
Before she had a chance to bite it back, Gallinda returned the smile, and at the same time a
sweeping wind sent a handful of hail against the glass, and the latch broke. Galinda leaped to swing
the casement shut, but Elphaba scuttled to the far corner of the room, away from the wet. “Give me
the leather luggage grip, Miss Elphaba, from inside my satchel-there on the shelf, behind the
hatboxes-yes-and I’ll secure this until we can get the porter to fix it tomorrow.” Elphaba found the
strap, but in doing so the hat boxes tumbled down, and three colorful hats rolled out onto the cold
floor. While Galinda scrabbled up on a chair to organize the window shut again, Elphaba returned
the hats to their boxes. “Oh, try it on, try that one on,” said Galinda. She meant to have something to
laugh at, to tell Misses Pfannee and Shenshen about and so to work her way back into their good
graces.
“Oh, I daren’t, Miss Galinda,” Elphaba said, and went to set the hat away.
“No, do, I insist,” Galinda said, “for a lark. I’ve never seen you in something pretty.”
“I don’t wear pretty things.”
“What’s the harm?” said Galinda. “Just here. No one else need see you.”
Elphaba stood facing the fire, but turned her head on her shoulders to look long and unblinkingly
at Galinda, who had not yet hopped down from the chair. The Munchkinlander was in her nightgown,

a drab sack without benefit of lace edging or piping. The green face above the wheatgray fabric
seemed almost to glow, and the glorious long straight black hair fell right over where breasts should
be if she would ever reveal any evidence that she possessed them. Elphaba looked like something
between an
animal and an animal like something more than life but not quite Life.
There was an expectancy but no intuition, was that it?-like a child who has never remembered
having a dream being told to have sweet dreams. You’d almost call it unrefined, but not in a social
sense-more in a sense of nature not having done its full job with Elphaba, not quite having managed
to make her enough like herself.
“Oh, put the damn hat on, really,” said Galinda, for whom, where introspection was concerned,
enough was enough.
Elphaba obliged. The thing was the lovely roundel bought from the best milliner in the Pertha
Hills. It had orangey swags and a yellow lace net that could be draped to achieve varying degrees of
disguise. On the wrong head it would look ghastly, and Galinda expected to have to bite the inside of
her lip to keep from laughing. It was the kind of super-feminine thing boys in a pantomime wore
when they pretended to be girls.
But Elphaba dropped the whole sugary plate onto her strange pointed head, and looked at
Gallinda again from underneath the broad brim. She seemed like a rare flower, her skin stemlike in
its soft pearlescent sheen, the hat a botanical riot. “Oh Miss Elphaba,” said Galinda, “you terrible
mean thing, you’re pretty.”
“Oh, and now you have lied, so go confess to the unionist minister,” said Elphaba. “Is there a
looking glass?”
“Of course there is, down the hall in the lavatory.”
“Not there. I’m not going to be seen by those ninnies in this.”
“Well then,” decided Galinda, “can you find an angle without hiding the firelight, and look at
your reflection in the dark window?”
They both gazed at the green and flowery spectre reflected in the watery old glass, surrounded
by the blackness, driven through with the wild rain beyond. A maplefruit leaf, shaped like a star with
blunted points, or like a heart grown lopsided, suddenly whirled out of the night and plastered itself
on the reflection in the glass, gleaming red and reflecting the firelight, just where the heart would beor so it seemed from the angle at which Galinda stood.
“Entrancing,” she said. “There’s some strange exotic quality of beauty about you. I never
thought.”
“Surprise,” said Elphaba, and then nearly blushed, if darker green
constituted a blush-“I mean, surprise, not beauty. It’s just surprise. ‘Well, what do you know.’
It’s not beauty.”
“Who am I to argue,” said Galinda, tossing her curls and striking a pose, and Elphaba actually
laughed at that, and Galinda laughed back, partly horrified as she did so. Elphaba tore the hat off
then, and returned it to its box, and when she picked up her book again Galinda said, “So what is
Beauty reading anyway? I mean really, tell me, why the old sermons?”
“My father is a unionist minister,” said Elphaba. “I’m just curious what it’s all about, that’s
all.”
“Why don’t you just ask him?”
Elphaba didn’t answer. Her face took on a solid, waiting look, like that of an owl just about to
go for a mouse.
“So what’re they on about? Anything interesting?” said Galinda. No sense giving up now, there
was nothing else to do and she was too wrought up by the storm to sleep.

“This one is thinking about good and evil,” said Elphaba. “Whether they really exist at all.”
“Oh, yawn,” said Galinda. “Evil exists, I know that, and its name is Boredom, and ministers are
the guiltiest crew of all.”
“You don’t really think that?”
Galinda didn’t often stop to consider whether she believed in what she said or not; the whole
point of conversation was flow. “Well, I didn’t mean to insult your father, for all I know he is an
entertaining and lively preacher.”
“No, I mean do you think evil really exists?”
“Well, how do I know what I think?”
“Well, ask yourself Miss Galinda. Does evil exist?”
“I don’t know. You say. Does evil exist?”
“I don’t expect to know.” The look went slanty and inwards somehow, or was it the hair
swinging forward like a veil again?
“Why don’t you just ask your father? I don’t understand. He should know, that’s his job.”
“My father taught me a lot,” Elphaba said slowly. “He was very well educated indeed. He
taught me to read and write and think, and more. But not enough. I just think, like our teachers here,
that if ministers are effective, they’re good at asking questions to get you to think. I don’t think
they’re supposed to have the answers. Not necessarily.”
“Oh, well, tell that to our boring minister at home. He has all the answers, and charges for them,
too.”
“But maybe there’s something to what you say,” said Elphaba. “I mean, evil and boredom. Evil
and ennui. Evil and the lack of stimulation. Evil and sluggish blood.”
“You’re writing a poem, it sounds like. Why ever would a girl be interested in evil?”
“I’m not interested in it. It’s just what the early sermons are all on about. So I’m thinking about
what they’re thinking about, that’s all. Sometimes they talk about diet and not eating Animals, and
then I think of that. I just like to think about what I’m reading. Don’t you?”
“I don’t read very well. So I don’t think I think very well either.” Galinda smiled. “I dress to
kill, though.”
There was no response from Elphaba. Galinda, usually pleased that she knew the correct way
to steer every conversation into a paean to herself, was flummoxed. She lamely ventured on, annoyed
at having to expend the effort. “Well, whatever did those old brutes think about evil, then?”
“It’s hard to say exactly. They seemed to be obsessed with locating it somewhere. I mean, an
evil spring in the mountains, an evil smoke, evil blood in the veins going from parent to child. They
were sort of like the early explorers of Oz, except the maps they made were of invisible stuff, pretty
inconsistent one with the other.”
“And where is evil located?” Galinda asked, flopping onto her bed and closing her eyes.
“Well, they didn’t agree, did they? Or else what would they have to write sermons arguing
about? Some said the original evil was the vacuum caused by the Fairy Queen Lurline leaving us
alone here. When goodness removes itself, the space it occupies corrodes and becomes evil, and
maybe splits apart and multiplies. So every evil thing is a sign of the absence of deity.”
“Well I wouldn’t know an evil thing if it fell on me,” said Galinda.
“The early unionists, who were a lot more Lurlinist than unionists are today, argued that some
invisible pocket of corruption was floating around the neighborhood, a direct descendent of the pain
the world felt when Lurline left. Like a patch of cold air on a warm still night. A perfectly agreeable
soul might march through it and become infected, and then go and kill a neighbor. But
then was it your fault if you walked through a patch of badness? If you couldn’t see it? There
wasn’t ever any council of unionists that decided it one way or the other, and nowadays so many

people don’t even believe in Lurline.”
“But they believe in evil still,” said Galinda with a yawn. “Isn’t that funny, that deity is passe
but the attributes and implications of deity linger-“
“You are thinking!” Elphaba cried. Galinda raised herself to her elbows at the enthusiasm in
her roomie’s voice.
“I am about to sleep, because this is profoundly boring to me,” Galinda said, but Elphaba was
grinning from ear to ear.
In the morning Ama Clutch regaled them both with tales of the night out. There was a talented
young witch in nothing but shocking pink undergarments, adorned with feathers and beads. She sang
songs to the audience and collected food tokens in her cleavage from the blushing undergraduate men
in the nearer tables. She did a little domestic magic, turning water into orange juice, changing
cabbages into carrots, and running knives through a terrified piglet, which spouted champagne
instead of blood. They all had a sip. A terrible fat man with a beard came on and chased the witch
around as if he would kiss her-oh, it was too funny, too funny! In the end the whole cast and audience
together stood and sang “What We Don’t Allow in the Public Halls (In Fact Is for Sale in the
Cheaper Stalls).” The Amas had a riotous good time, every one of them.
“Really,” said Galinda sniffily. “The pleasure faith is so-so common.”
“But I see the window broke,” said Ama Clutch. “I hope it wasn’t boys trying to climb in.”
“Are you mad?” said Galinda. “In that storm?”
“What storm?” said Ama Clutch. “That don’t make sense. Last night was as calm as moonlight.”
“Hah, that was some show,” said Galinda. “You were so caught up in pleasure faith you lost
your bearings, Ama Clutch.” They went down to breakfast together, leaving Elphaba still asleep, or
pretending to be asleep maybe. Though as they walked along the corridors, sun through the broad
windows making racks of light on the cold slate floors, Galinda did wonder about the capriciousness
of weather. Was it even possible for
a storm to pitch itself against one part of town and overlook another? There was so much about
the world she didn’t know.
“She did nothing but chatter about evil,” said Galinda to her friends, over buttered brisks with
ploughfoot jelly. “Some inside tap was turned on, and prattle just poured out of her. And, girls, when
she tried on my hat, I could’ve died. She looked like somebody’s maiden aunt come up out of the
grave, I mean as frumpy as a Cow. I endured it only for you, so I could tell you all; otherwise I’d
have expired with glee on the spot. It was so very much!”
“You poor thing, to have to be our spy and stand the shame of that grasshopper roomie!” said
Pfannee devoutly, clasping Galinda’s hand. “You’re too good!”
One evening-the first evening of snow-Madame Morrible held a poetry soiree. Boys from Three
Queens and Ozma Towers were invited. Galinda brought out her cerise satin gown with the matching
shawl and slippers and an heirloom Gillikinese fan, painted with a pattern of ferns and phoenix. She
arrived early to lay claim to the upholstered chair that would best set off her own attire, and she
dragged the chair over to the bookshelves so that the light from library tapers would gently fall on
her. The rest of the girls-not only the freshers, but the sophisters and seniors-entered in a whispering
clot and arranged themselves on sofas and lounges in Crage Hall’s nicest parlor. The boys who came
were somewhat disappointing; there weren’t that many, and they looked terrified, or giggled with
one another. Then the professors and doctors arrived, not just the Animals from Crage Hall, but the
boys’ professors too, who were mostly men. The girls began to be glad they had dressed well, for
while the boys were a spotty bunch, the male professors had grave and charming smiles.
Even some of the Amas came, though they sat behind a screen at the back of the room. The
sound of their knitting needles going at a rapid rate was soothing to Galinda, somehow. She knew

Ama Clutch would be there.
The double doors at the end of the parlor were swept open by that little bronze industrial crab
Galinda had met on her first evening at Crage Hall. It had been especially serviced for the occasion;
you could still detect the cutting scent of metal polish. Madame Morrible then made an entrance,
severe and striking in a coal black cape, which she let drop to the floor (the thingy picked it up and
slung it over a sofa back); her gown was a fiery orange, with abalone lake shells stitched all over it.
Despite herself Galinda had to admire the effect. In tones even more unctuous than usual, Madame
Morrible welcomed the visitors and led polite applause at the notion of Poetry and Its Civilizing
Effects.
Then she spoke on the new verse form sweeping the social parlors and poetry dens of Shin. “It
is known as the Quell,” said Madame Morrible, in her Headmistress’s smile displaying an
impressive assembly of teeth. “The Quell is a brief poem, uplifting in nature. It pairs a sequence of
thirteen short lines with a concluding, unrhyming apothegm. The reward of the poem is in the
revealing contrast between rhyming argument and concluding remark. Sometimes they may contradict
each other, but always they illuminate and, like all poetry, sanctify life.” She beamed like a beacon
in a fog. “Tonight especially, a Quell might serve as an anodyne to the unpleasant disruptions we
have been hearing about in our nation’s capital.” The boy students looked at least alert, and all the
professors nodded, though Galinda could tell none of the girl students had a clue as to what
“unpleasant disruptions” Madame Morrible was prattling on about.
A third-year girl at the hammer-strung keyboard clattered out a couple of chords, and the guests
cleared their throats and looked at their shoes. Galinda saw Elphaba arrive in the back of the room,
dressed in her usual casual red shift, two books under her arm and a scarf wound around her head.
She sank into the last empty chair, and bit into an apple just as Madame Morrible was drawing in a
dramatic breath to begin.
Sing a hymn to rectitude,
Ye forward-thinking multitude.
Advance in humble gratitude
For strictest rules of attitude.
To elevate the Common Good
In Brotherhood and Sisterhood
We celebrate authority.
Fraternity, Sorority,
United, pressing onward, we
Restrict the ills of liberty.
There is no numinosity
Like Power’s generosity
In helping curb atrocity.
Bear down on the rod and foil the child.
Madame Morrible lowered her head to signify that she was done. There was a rumbling of
indistinct comments. Galinda, who didn’t know much about Poetry, thought perhaps this was the
accepted way of appreciating it. She grumbled a little bit to Shenshen, who sat in a straightback chair
to one side, looking dropsical. Wax from the taper was about to drip onto Shenshen’s silkshouldered white gown with the lemon-chiffon swags, and ruin it, most likely, but Galinda decided
Shenshen’s family could afford to replace a gown. She kept still.
“Another,” said Madame Momble. “Another Quell.”
The room grew silent, but a little uneasily so?
Alas! For impropriety,

The guillotine of piety.
To remedy society
Indulge not to satiety
In mirth and shameless gaiety.
Choose sobering sobriety.
Behave as if the deity
Approaches in its mystery,
And greet it with sonority.
Let your especial history
Be built upon sorority
Whose Virtues do exemplify,
And Social Good thus multiply.
Animals should be seen and not heard.
Again, there was mumbling, but it was of a different nature now, a meaner key. Doctor
Dillamond harrumphed and beat a cloven hoof against the floor, and was heard to say, “Well that’s
not poetry, that’s propaganda, and it’s not even good propaganda at that.”
Elphaba sidled over to Galinda’s side with her chair under her arm, and plunked it down
between Galinda and Shenshen. She put her bony behind on its slatted seat and leaned to Galinda and
asked, ‘What do you make of this?”
It was the first time Galinda had ever been addressed by Elphaba in public. Mortification
bloomed. “I don’t know,” she said faintly, looking in the other direction.
“It’s a cleverness, isn’t it?” said Elphaba. “I mean that last line, you couldn’t tell by that fancy
accent whether it was meant to be Animals or animals. No wonder Dillamond’s furious.”
And he was. Doctor Dillamond looked around the room as if trying to marshal the opposition.
“I’m shocked, shocked,” he said. “Deeply shocked,” he amended, and he marched out of the room.
Professor Lenx, the Boar who taught math, left too, accidentally crushing an antique gilded sideboard
through trying to avoid stepping on Miss Milla’s yellowlace train. Mister Mikko, the Ape who taught
history, sat dolefully in the shadows, too confused and ill at ease to make a move. “Well,” said
Madame Momble in a carrying tone, “one expects poetry, if it is Poetry, to offend. It is the Right of
Art.”
“I think she’s bonkers,” said Elphaba. Galinda found it too horrible. What if even one of the
pimply boys saw Elphaba whispering to her! She’d never hold her head up in society again. Her life
was ruined. “Shhh, I’m listening, I love poetry,” Galinda told her sternly. “Don’t talk to me, you’re
ruining my evening.”
Elphaba sat back, and finished her apple, and they both kept listening. The grumbling and
murmuring grew louder after each poem, and the boys and girls began to relax and look around at
one another.
When the last Quell of the evening had knelled (to the cryptic aphorism “A witch in time saves
nine”), Madame Morrible retired to uneven applause. She allowed her bronze servant to administer
tea to the guests, and then the girls, and finally the Amas. In a heap of rustling silk and clicking
abalone lake shells, she received compliments from the male professors and some of the braver
boys, and begged them to sit near her so she could enjoy their criticisms. “Do tell the truth. I was
overly dramatic, wasn’t I? It is my curse. The stage called, but I chose a life of Service to Girls.”
She lowered her eyelashes in modesty as her captive audience mumbled a lukewarm protest.
Galinda was still trying to extricate herself from the embarrassing company of Elphaba, who
kept on about the Quells and what they meant, and if they were any good. “How do I know, how
should I know, we’re first-year girls, remember?” said Galinda, yearning to swish over to where

Pfannee, Milla, and Shenshen were squeezing lemons into the teacups of a few edgy boys.
“Well, your opinion is as good as hers, I think,” said Elphaba. “That’s the real power of art, I
think. Not to chide but to provoke challenge. Otherwise why bother?”
A boy came up to them. Galinda thought he wasn’t much to look at, but anything was better than
the green leech at her side. “How do you do?” said Galinda, not even waiting for him to get up his
nerve. “It’s so nice to meet you. You must be from, let’s see-“
“Well, I’m from Briscoe Hall, actually,” he said. “But I’m a Munchkinlander originally. As you
can tell.” And she could, for he hardly came up to her shoulder. He wasn’t bad looking for all that. A
spun-cotton mess of ill-combed golden hair, a toothy smile, a better complexion than some. The
evening tunic he wore was a provincial blue, but there were flecks of silver thread running through
it. He was trim, nicely so. His boots were polished and he stood a little bandy-legged, feet pointed
out.
“This is what I love,” said Galinda, “meeting strangers. This is Shia at its finest. I am
Gillikinese.” She just managed to keep herself frost adding, of course, for she believed it evident in
her attire. Munchkinlander girls had a habit of quieter dress, so understated that they were often
mistaken, in Shiz, for servants.
“Well then, hello to you,” said the boy. “My name is Master Boq.”
“Miss Galinda of the Arduennas of the Uplands.”
“And you?” said Boq, turning to Elphaba. “Who are you?”
“I’m leaving,” she said. “Fresh dreams, all.”
“No, don’t leave,” said Boq. “I think I know you.”
“You don’t know me,” said Elphaba, pausing as she turned “However could you know me?”
“You’re Miss Elphie, aren’t you?”
“Miss Elphie!” cried Galinda gaily. “How delightful!”
“How do you know who I am?” said Elphaba. “Master Boq from Munchkinland? I don’t know
you.”
“You and I played together when you were tiny,” said Boq. “My father was the mayor of the
village you were born in. I think. You were born in Rush Margins, in Wend Hardings, weren’t you?
You’re the daughter of the unionist minister, I forget his name.”
“Frex,” said Elphaba. Her eyes looked slanted and wary.
“Frexspar the Godly!” said Boq. “That’s right. You know they still talk about him, and your
mama, and the night the Clock of the Time Dragon came to Rush Margins. I was two or three years
old and they took me to see it, but I don’t remember that. I do remember that you were in a play set
with me when I was still in short pants. Do you remember Gawnette? She was the woman who
minded us. And Bree? He is my dad. Do you remember Rush Margins?”
“This is all smoke and guesswork,” said Elphaba. “How can I contradict? Let me tell you about
what happened in your life before you can remember it. You were born a frog.” (This was unkind, as
Boq did have an amphibious look about him.) “You got sacrificed to the Clock of the Time Dragon
and were turned into a boy. But on your marriage night when your wife opens her legs you’ll turn
back into a tadpole and-“
“Miss Elphaba!” cried Galinda, flicking open her fan to wave the flush of shame from her face.
“Your tongue!”
“Oh well, I have no childhood,” said Elphaba. “So you can say what you like. I grew up in
Quadling Country with the marsh people. I squelch when I walk. You don’t want to talk to me. Talk
to Miss Galinda, she’s much better in parlors than I am. I have to go now.” Elphaba nodded a good
night salute and escaped, almost at a run.
“Why did she say all that?” said Boq, no embarrassment in his voice, just wonder. “Of course I

remember her. How many green people are there?”
“It’s just possible,” considered Galinda. “that she didn’t like being recognized on account of
her skin color. I don’t know for sure, but perhaps she’s sensitive about it.”
“She must know that it’s what people would remember.”
“Well, as far as I am aware, you are right about who she is,” Galinda went on. “They tell me
her great-grandfather is the Eminent Thropp of Colwen Grounds in Nest Hardings.”
“That’s the one,” Boq said. “Elphie. I never thought I’d see her again.”
“Won’t you have some more tea? I’ll call the server,” Galinda said. “Let us sit here and you can
tell me all about Munchkinland. I am aquiver with curiosity.” She perched herself back on the chairin-sympathetic-colors and looked her very best. Boq sat down, and shook his head, as if bewildered
by the apparition of Elphaba.
When Galinda retired that evening, Elphaba was already in bed, blankets pulled up over her
head, and a patently theatrical snore issuing forth. Galinda huffed herself into bed with a lump,
annoyed that she could feel rejected by the green girl.
In the week that followed much was said about the evening of Quells. Doctor Dillamond
interrupted his biology lecture to call for a response from his students. The girls didn’t understand
what a biological response to poetry might be and sat silent at his leading questions. He finally
exploded, “Doesn’t anyone make the connection between the expression of those thoughts and what’s
been going on in the Emerald City?”
Miss Pfannee, who didn’t believe she was paying tuition in order to be yelled at, snapped back
at him. “We don’t have the tiniest notion what’s going on in the Emerald City! Stop playing games
with us; if you have something to say, say it. Don’t bleat so.”
Doctor Dillamond stared out the windows and seemed to be trying to control his temper. The
students were thrilled with the little drama. Then the Goat turned and in a milder voice than they
expected he told them that the Wizard of Oz had proclaimed Banns on Animal Mobility, effective
several weeks ago. This meant not only that Animals were restricted in their access to travel
conveyances, lodgings, and public services. The Mobility it referred to was also professional. Any
Animal coming of age was prohibited from working in the professions or the public
sector. They were, effectively, to be herded back to the farmlands and wilds if they wanted to
work for wages at all.
“What do you think Madame Morrible was saying when she ended that Quell with the epigram
Animals should be seen and not heard?” asked the Goat tersely.
“Well, anyone would be upset,” said Galinda. “I mean, any Animal. But it’s not as if your job is
threatened, is it? Here you are, still teaching us.”
“What about my children? What about my kids?”
“Do you have kids? I didn’t know you were married.”
The Goat closed his eyes. “I’m not married, Miss Galinda. But I might be. Or I may. Or perhaps
I have nieces and nephews. They have already been banned effectively from studying at Shin because
they can’t hold a pencil to write an essay with. How many Animals have you ever seen in this
paradise of education?” Well, it was true; there were none.
“Well, I do think it’s pretty dreadful,” said Galinda. “Why would the Wizard of Oz do such a
thing?”
“Why indeed,” said the Goat.
“No, really, why. It’s a real question. I don’t know.”
“I don’t know either.” The Goat turned to his rostrum and shoved some papers this way and
that, and was then seen pawing a handkerchief from a lower shelf, and blowing his nose. “My
grandmothers were milking-Goats at a farm in Gillikin. Through their lifelong sacrifices and labors

they purchased the help of a local schoolteacher to educate me and to take dictation when I went for
my exams. Their efforts are about to go to waste.”
“But you can still teach!” said Pfannee petulantly.
“The thin edge of the wedge, my dear,” said the Goat, and dismissed the class early. Galinda
found herself glancing over toward Elphaba, who had a strange, focused look. As Galinda fled the
classroom, Elphaba approached the front of the room, where Doctor Dillamond stood shaking in
uncontrolled spasms, his horned head bowed.
A few days later, Madame Morrible gave one of her occasional open lectures on Early Hymns
and Pagan Paeans. She called for questions, and the entire assembly was startled to see Elphaba
unfold herself from her customary fetal position in the back of the room and address the Head.
“Madame Morrible, if you please,” said Elphaba, “we never had an opportunity to discuss the
Quells that you recited in the parlor last week.”
“Discuss,” said Madame Morrible with a generous though shooing wave of the bangled hands.
“Well, Doctor Dillamond seemed to think they were in questionable taste, given the Banns on
Animal Mobility.”
“Doctor Dillamond, alas,” said Madame Morrible, “is a doctor. He is not a poet. He is also a
Goat, and I might ask you girls if we have ever had a great Goat sonneteer or balladeer? Alas, dear
Miss Elphaba, Doctor Dillamond doesn’t understand the poetic convention of irony. Would you like
to define irony for the class, please?”
“I don’t believe I can, Madame.”
“Irony, some say, is the art of juxtaposing incongruous parts. One needs a knowing distance.
Irony presupposes detachment, which, alas, in the case of Animal Rights, we may forgive Doctor
Dillamond for being without.”
“So that phrase that he objected to-Animals should be seen and not heard-that was ironic?”
continued Elphaba, studying her papers and not looking at Madame Morrible. Galinda and her
classmates were enthralled, for it was clear that each of the females at opposite ends of the room
would have enjoyed seeing the other crumple in a sudden attack of the spleen.
“One could consider it in an ironic mode if one chose,” said Madame Morrible.
“How do you choose?” said Elphaba.
“How impertinent!” said Madame Morrible.
“Well, but I don’t mean impertinence. I’m trying to learn. If you- if anyone-thought that
statement was true, then it isn’t in conflict with the boring bossy bit that preceded it. It’s just
argument and conclusion, and I don’t see the irony.”
“You don’t see much, Miss Elphaba,” said Madame Morrible. “You must learn to put yourself
in the shoes of someone wiser than you are, and look from that angle. To be stuck in ignorance, to be
circumscribed by the walls of one’s own modest acumen, well, it Is very sad in one so young and
bright.” She spit out the last word, and it seemed to Galinda, somehow, a low comment on Elphaba’s
skin color, which today was indeed lustrous with the effort of public speaking.
“But I was trying to put myself in the shoes of Doctor Dillamond,” said Elphaba, almost
whining, but not giving up.
“In the case of poetic interpretation, I venture to suggest, it may indeed be true. Animals should
not be heard,” snapped Madame Morrible.
“Do you mean that ironically?” said Elphaba, but she sat down with her hands over her face,
and did not look up again for the rest of the session.
When the second semester began, and Galinda was still saddled with Elphaba as a roomie, she
made a brief protest to Madame Morrible. But the Head would allow no shifting, no rearranging.
“Far too upsetting for my other girls,” she said. “Unless you’d like to be removed to the Pink

Dormitory. Your Ama Clutch seems, to my watchful eye, to be recovering from the ailments you
described when first we met. Perhaps now she is up to overseeing fifteen girls?”
“No, no,” said Galinda quickly. “There are recurrences from time to time, but I don’t mention
them. I don’t like to be a bother.”
“How thoughtful,” said Madame Momble. “Bless you, sweet thing. Now my dear, I wonder if
we might take a moment, as long as you’ve come in for a chat, to discuss your academic plans for
next fall? As you know, second year is when girls choose their specialties. Have you given it any
thought?”
“Very little,” said Galinda. “Frankly, I thought my talents would just emerge and make it clear
whether I should try natural science, or the arts, or sorcery, or perhaps even history. I don’t think I’m
cut out for ministerial work.”
“I’m not surprised that one such as you should be in doubt,” said Madame Morrible, which
wasn’t greatly encouraging to Galinda. “But may I suggest sorcery? You could be very good at it. I
pride myself on knowing this sort of thing.”
“I’ll think about it,” said Galinda, though her early appetite for sorcery had waned once she’d
heard what a grind it was to learn spells and, worse, to understand them.
“In the event you choose sorcery, it might-just might-be possible to find for you a new roomie,”
said Madame Morrible, “given that
Miss Elphaba has already told me her interests lie in the natural sciences.”
“Oh well then, I certainly will give it a great deal of thought,” said Galinda. She struggled with
unnamed conflicts within her. Madame Morrible, for all her upper-class diction and fabulous
wardrobe, seemed just a tad-oh-dangerous. As if her big public smile were composed of the light
glancing off knives and lances, as if her deep voice masked the rumbling of distant explosions.
Galinda always felt as if she couldn’t see the whole picture. It was disconcerting, and to her credit at
least Galinda felt inside herself the ripping apart of some valuable fabric-was it integrity?-when she
sat in Madame Morrible’s parlor and drank the perfect tea.
“For the sister, I hear, is eventually coming up to Shin,” concluded Madame Morrible a few
minutes later, as if silence had not intervened, and several tasty biscuits, “because there’s nothing I
can do to stop it. And that, I understand, would be dreadful. You would not like it. The sister being
as she is. Undoubtedly spending much time in Miss Elphaba’s room, being tended to.” She smiled
wanly. A puff of powdery aroma came forward from the flank of her neck, almost as if Madame
Morrible could somehow dispense a pleasant personal odor at will.
“The sister being as she is.” Madame Morrible tutted and wagged her head back and forth as
she saw Galinda to the door. “Miserable, really, but I suppose we shall all pull together and cope.
That is sorority, isn’t it?” The Head grasped her shawl and put a gentle hand on Galinda’s shoulder.
Galinda shivered, and was sure Madame Morrible felt it, knew it, but the Head never registered a
sign of it. “But then, my use of sorority-how ironic. Too witty. Given a long enough time, of course, a
wide enough frame, there is nothing said or done, ever, that isn’t ironic in the end.” She squeezed
Galinda’s shoulder blade as if it were a bicycle handle. almost harder than was proper for a woman
to do. “We can only hope- ha ha-that the sister comes with some veils of her own! But that’s year
yet. Meanwhile we have time. Think about sorcery, would you? Do Now good-bye, my pet, and
fresh dreams.”
Galinda walked back to her room slowly, wondering what Elphaba’s sister was like to provoke
those catty remarks about veils. She wanted to ask Elphaba. But she couldn’t think of how to do it.
She didn’t have the nerve.
Come on out,” said the boys. “Come out.” They were leaning in the archway to Boq’s room, a
pell-mell clot of them, backlit by the oil lamp in the study beyond. “We’re sick of books. Come with

us.”
“Can’t,” said Boq. “I’m behind in irrigation theory.”
“Fuck your irrigation theory when the pubs are open,” said the strapping Gillikinese bucko
named Avaric. “You’re not going to improve your grades at this late date, with the exams almost
over and the examiners half-crocked themselves.”
“It’s not the grades,” said Boq. “I just don’t understand it yet.”
“We’re off to the pub, we’re off to the pub,” chanted some boys who, it seemed, had gotten a
head start. “Fuck Boq, the ale is waiting, and it’s already aged enough!”
“Which pub, then, maybe I’ll join you in an hour,” Boq said, sitting firmly back in his chair and
not lifting his feet to the footstool, as he knew that this might incite his classmates to hoist him to
their shoulders and carry him off with them for an evening of debauchery. His smallness seemed to
inspire such banditry. Feet square on the floor made him look more planted, he figured.
“The Boar and Fennel,” said Avaric. “They’ve got a new witch performing. They say she’s hot.
She’s a Kumbric Witch.”
“Hah,” said Boq, unconvinced. “Well, go on and get a good view. I’ll come along when I can.”
The boys rambled away, rattling doors of other friends, knocking aslant the portraits of old boys
now grown into august patrons. Avaric stood in the archway and waited a minute longer. “We might
ditch some
of the boors and take a select few of us off to the Philosophy Club,” he said enticingly. “Later
on, I mean. It’s the weekend, after all.”
“Oh, Avaric, go take a cold shower,” said Boq.
“You admitted you were curious. You did. So why not an end-of-semester treat?”
“I’m sorry I ever said I was curious. I’m curious about death, too, but I can wait to find out,
thank you. Get lost, Avaric. Better go catch up with your friends. Enjoy the Kumbric antics, which by
the way I expect is false advertising. Kumbric Witch talents went out hundreds of years ago. If
indeed they ever existed.”
Avaric turned up the second collar of his tunic-jacket. The inside was lined with a deep red
velvet plush. Against his elegant shaven neck the lining seemed like a single ribbon of privilege. Boq
found himself, once again, making mental comparisons between himself and handsome Avaric, and
coming up-well, coming up short. “What, Avaric,” he said, as impatient with himself as he was with
his friend.
“Something has happened to you,” said Avaric. “I’m not that dull. What’s wrong?”
“Nothing’s wrong,” said Boq.
“Tell me to mind my own business, tell me to go flick myself, to piss off, go on, say it, but don’t
tell me nothing’s wrong. For you’re not that good a liar, and I’m not that stupid. Even for a dissipated
Gillikinese of decaying nobility.” His expression was soft, and Boq, momentarily, was tempted. His
mouth opened as he thought of what to say, but at the sound of bells in Ozma Towers, chiming the
hour, Avaric’s head turned just a fraction. For all his concern, Avaric wasn’t entirely here. Boq
closed his mouth, thought some more, and said, “Call it Munchkinlander stolidity. I won’t lie,
Avaric, you’re too good a friend to lie to. But there’s nothing to say now. Now go on and enjoy
yourself. But be careful.” He was about to add a word of warning against the Philosophy Club, but
checked it. If Avaric was annoyed enough, then Boq’s nannyish worrying might backfire and goad
Avaric into going there.
Avaric came forward and kissed him on both cheeks and on the forehead, an upper-class
northern custom that always made Boq profoundly ill at ease. Then with a wink and a dirty gesture,
he disappeared.
Boq’s room looked out over a cobblestoned alley, down which Avaric

and his cronies were swooping and weaving. Boq stood back, in the shadows, but needn’t have
worried; his friends weren’t thinking of him now. They had made it through the halfway point in their
exams and had a breather for a couple of days. After the exams, the campus would lie vacant except
for the more befuddled of the professors and the poorer of the boys. Boq had lived through this
before. He preferred study, however, to scrubbing old manuscripts with a five-haired reck-fur brush,
which was what he would be employed to do in the Three Queens library all summer long.
Across the alley ran the bluestone wall of a private stable, attached to some mansion house a
few streets away on a fashionable square. Beyond the stable roof you could see the rounded tops of a
few fruit trees, in the kitchen garden of Crage Hall, and above them glowed the lancet windows of
the dormitories and classrooms. When the girls forgot to draw their drapes- which was astoundingly
often-you could see them in various stages of undress. Never the whole body naked, of course; in that
case he would have looked away, or told himself sternly that he had better. But the pinkness and
whiteness of underskirts and camisoles, the filminess of foundation garments, the rustle about the
bustle and the fuss about the bust. It was an education in lingerie if nothing else. Boq, who had no
sisters, merely looked.
The Crage Hall dormitory was just far enough away that he couldn’t make out the individual
girls. And Boq was flushed with desire to see his heartthrob again. Damn! Double damn! He
couldn’t concentrate. He’d be sent down if he queered his exams! He’d let down his father, old Bree,
and his village, and the other villages.
Hell and hell. Life was hard and barley just wasn’t enough. Boq found himself suddenly leaping
over the footstool, grabbing his student cape, charging down the corridors, and plummeting around
the stone spiral stairs in the corner tower. He couldn’t wait any more. He had to do something, and
an idea had come to him.
He nodded to the porter on duty, turned left out of the gate, and hurried along the road, in the
dusk avoiding as best he could the generous heaps of horse manure. At least with his classmates off
gallivanting, he would make no fool of himself in their line of vision. There wasn’t a soul left in
Briscoe. So he turned left, then left again, and soon was pacing the alley by the stable. A rick of
cordwood, the protruding edge of a swollen shutter, the iron bracket of a hoist. Boq was small but he
was nimble too,
and with hardly a scrape of his knuckles he had swung himself to the tin gutter of the stable, and
then was scrabbling like a lake crab up the steeply pitched roof.
Aha! He might have thought of this weeks ago, months ago! But the night that all the boys would
be out celebrating, the night he could be sure he himself wouldn’t be seen from Briscoe Hall: that
was tonight, and maybe only tonight. Some fate had insisted he resist Avaric’s invitation out. For
now he was mounted on the stable roof, and the wind coursing through the wet leaves of the
cranberry and pear trees made a soft fanfare. And there proceeded the girls into their hall-as if
they’d been waiting in the corridor until he was properly positioned-as if they’d known he was
coming!
Closer up they were not, on the whole, as pretty.
But where was the one?
And pretty or not, they were clear. The fingers they dove into clumps of satin bow, to untie
them, the fingers they peeled gloves off with, and worked cunning rows of forty miniature pearl
buttons with, the fingers they loaned to each other, at the inside laces and the private places that
college boys knew only by mythology! The unexpected tufts of hair-how tender! How marvelously
animal like! His hands clenched and unclenched themselves, of their own accord, but hungry for
what he hardly knew-and where was she?
“What the hell are you doing up there?”

So he slipped, of course, because he was startled, and because fate, having been so kind as to
award him this ecstasy, retributively was going to kill him now. He lost his footing and grabbed for
the chimney but missed. Head over thighs he rolled out like a child’s toy, smashed into the poking
branches of the damn pear tree, which probably saved his life, breaking his fall. He landed with a
thud on a bed of lettuces, and the wind was loudly knocked out of him, mortifyingly so, through all
available orifices.
“Oh, brilliant,” said the voice. “The trees are dropping their fruits early this year.”
He had a last, lost hope that the person speaking would be his love. He tried to look urbane,
though his spectacles had bounced somewhere.
“How do you do,” he said uncertainly, sitting up. “This isn’t how I intended to arrive.”
Barefoot and aproned, she came out from behind an arbor of pink Pertha grapes. It wasn’t she, it
wasn’t the one. It was the other one. He could tell even without his glasses. “Oh, it’s you,” he said,
trying not to sound devastated.
She had a colander with baby grapes in it, the sour ones used in spring salads. “Oh, it’s you,”
she said, coming closer. “I know you.”
“Master Boq, at your service.”
“You mean Master Boq, in my lettuces.” She picked up his spectacles from the runner beans,
and handed them back.
“How are you, Miss Elphie?”
“I am not as tart as a grape and not as squished as a lettuce,” she said. “How are you, Master
Boq?”
“I am,” he said, “considerably embarrassed. Am I going to get in trouble here?”
“I can arrange it if you like.”
“Don’t go to the effort. I’ll let myself out the way I came in.” He looked up at the pear tree.
“Poor thing, I’ve splintered some good-size limbs.”
“Pity the poor tree. Why would you do that to it?”
“Well, I was startled,” he said, “and I had a choice: either flip myself like a wood nymph
through the leaves. Or else just climb quietly down on the other side of the stable, into the street, and
go back to my life. Which would you choose?”
“Ah, that’s the question,” she said, “but I’ve always learned that the first thing to do is deny the
question’s validity. Myself, being startled, I would neither climb quietly streetward, nor would I trip
noisily treeward and lettuce bound. I would turn myself inside out to make myself lighter, I would
hover until the air pressure outside me had stabilized. Then I would let the underside of my skin
settle, one toe at a time, back on the roof.”
“And would you then reverse your skin?” he said, entertained.
“Depends on who was standing there and what they wanted, and whether I minded. Also
depends on what color the underside of my skin turns out to be. Never having reversed myself, you
know, I can’t be sure. I always thought it might be horrid to be pink and white like a piglet.”
“It often is,” said Boq. “Especially in the shower. You feel like an
underdone-” But he stopped. The nonsense was becoming too personal. “I do beg your pardon,”
he said. “I startled you and I didn’t mean to.”
“You were looking at the tops of the fruit trees, examining the new growth, I assume?” she said,
amused.
“Indeed,” he answered coldly.
“Did you see the tree of your dreams?”
“The tree of my dreams is of my dreams, and I don’t speak of that to my friends nor to you,
whom I hardly know.”

“Oh, but you know me. We were in a child play set together, you reminded me when we met
last year. Why, we’re nearly brother and sister. You can certainly describe your favorite tree to me,
and I’ll tell you if I know where she grows.”
“You mock me, Miss Elphie.”
“Well, that I don’t mean to do, Boq.” She used his name without the honorific in a gentle way,
as if to underscore her comment about their being like siblings. “I suspect you want to know about
Miss Galinda, the Gillikinese girl you met at Madame Morrible’s poetry slaughter last autumn.”
“Perhaps you do know me better than I thought.” He sighed. “Could I hope she thinks of me?”
“Well, you could hope,” said Elphaba. “It would be more efficient to ask her and have done
with it. At least you’d know.”
“But you’re a friend of hers, aren’t you? Don’t you know?”
“You don’t want to rely on what I know or not,” said Elphaba, “or what I say I know. I could be
lying. I could be in love with you, and betray my roomie by lying about her-“
“She’s your roomie?”
“You’re very surprised at that?”
“Well-no-just-just pleased.”
“The cooks will be wondering what dialogues with the asparagus I’m having now,” Elphaba
said. “I could arrange to bring Miss Galinda here some evening if you like. Sooner rather than later,
so as to kill your joy the more neatly and entirely. If that is what’s to happen,” she said, “but as I say,
how do I know? If I can’t predict what we’ll have for pudding, how can I predict someone’s
affections?”
They set a date for three nights hence, and Boq thanked Elphaba fervently, shaking her hand so
hard his spectacles jounced on his nose. “You’re a dear old friend, Elphie, even if I haven’t seen you
in fifteen years,” he said, giving her back her name without its honorific. She withdrew beneath the
boughs of the pear trees and disappeared down the walkway. Boq found his way out of the kitchen
garden and back to his room, and reviewed his books again, but the problem wasn’t solved, no, not
solved. It was exacerbated. He couldn’t concentrate. He was still awake to hear the noisy
clatterings, the hushings, the crashings, and the muttered ballatherings, when the drunken boys
returned to Briscoe Hall.
Avaric had left for the summer, once the exams were done, and Boq either had flimflammed his
way through or disgraced himself, in which case there was little to lose now. This first rendezvous
with Galinda might be the last. Boq bothered with his clothes more than usual, and got an opinion on
how to fix his hair from the new look in the cafes (a thin white ribbon around the crown of his head,
pulling his hair straight from the nub, so that it burst into curls beneath, like froth exploding from an
overturned basin of milk). He cleaned his boots several times over. It was too warm for boots but he
had no evening slippers. Make do, make do.
On the appointed evening he retraced his way and, on the stable roof, found that a fruit picker’s
ladder had been left leaning up against the wall, so he need not descend through the leaves like a
vertiginous chimpanzee. He picked his way carefully down the first few rungs, then jumped manfully
the rest of the way, avoiding the lettuces this time. On a bench under the wormnut trees sat Elphaba,
her knees drawn casually up to her chest and her bare feet flat on the seat of the bench, and Galinda,
whose ankles were crossed daintily and who hid behind a satin fan, and who was looking in the
other direction anyway.
“Well, my stars and garters, a visitor,” said Elphaba. “Such a surprise.”
“Good evening, ladies,” he said.
“Your head looks like a hedgehog in shock, what did you do to yourself?” said Elphaba. At
least Galinda turned to see, but then she disappeared behind the fan again. Could she be so nervous?

Could her heart be faint?
“Well I am part Hedgehog, didn’t I tell you?” said Boq. “On my grandfather’s side. He ended
up as cutlets for Ozma’s retinue one hunting season, and a tasty memory for all. The recipe is handed
down in the family, pasted into the picture album. Served with cheese and walnut sauce. Mmmm.”
“Are you really?” said Elphaba. She put her chin on her knees. “Really Hedgehog?”
“No, it was a fancy. Good evening, Miss Galinda. It was good of you to agree to meet me
again.”
“This is highly improper,” said Gallinda. “For a number of reasons, as you well know, Master
Boq. But my roomie would give me no rest until I said yes. I can’t say that I am pleased to see you
again.”
“Oh, say it, say it, maybe it’ll make it true,” said Elphaba. “Try it out. He’s not so bad. For a
poor boy.”
“I am pleased that you are so taken with me, Master Boq,” said Miss Galinda, working at
courtesy. “I am flattered.” She clearly was not flattered, she was humiliated. “But you must see that
there can be no special friendship between us. Apart from the matter of my feelings, there are too
many social impediments for us to proceed. I only agreed to come so that I could tell you this in
person. It seemed only fair.”
“It seemed only fair and it might be fun, too,” said Elphaba. “That’s why I’m hanging around.”
“There’s the issue of different cultures, to start,” said Galinda. “I know you are a
Munchkinlander. I am a Gillikinese. I will need to marry one of my own. It is the only way, I’m
sorry”-she lowered her fan and lifted her hand, palm out, to stop his protest-“and furthermore you
are a farmer, from the agricultural school, and I require a statesman or a banker from Ozma Towers.
This is just how things are. Besides,” said Galinda, “you’re too short.”
“What about his subversion of custom by coming here this way, what about his silliness?” said
Elphaba.
“Enough,” said Galinda. “That’ll do, Miss Elphaba.”
“Please, you’re too certain of yourself,” said Boq. “If I may behold.”
“You’re not so bold at all,” said Elphaba, “you’re about as bold as tea made from used leaves.
You’re embarrassing me with hanging back so. Come on, say something interesting. I’m starting to
wish I’d gone to chapel.”
“You’re interrupting,” said Boq. “Miss Elphie, you’ve done a wonderful thing to encourage
Miss Galinda to meet me, but I must ask you to leave us alone to sort things out.”
“Neither of you will understand what the other is saying,” said Elphaba calmly. “I’m a
Munchkinlander by birth anyway, if not by upbringing, and I’m a girl by accident if not by choice.
I’m the natural arbiter between you two. I don’t believe you can get along without me. In fact if I
leave the garden you’ll cease to decipher each other’s language entirely. She speaks the tongue of
Rich, you speak Clotted Poor. Besides, I paid for this show by wheedling Miss Galinda for three
days running. I get to watch.”
“It would be so good of you to stay, Miss Elphaba,” said Galinda, “I require a chaperone when
with a boy.”
“See what I mean?” Elphaba said to Boq.
“Then if you must stay, at least let me talk,” Boq said. “Please let me speak, just for a few
minutes, Miss Galinda. What you say is true. You are highborn and I am common. You are
Gillikinese and I, Munchkinlander. You have a social pattern to conform to, and so do I. And mine
doesn’t include marrying a girl too wealthy, too foreign, too expectant. Marriage isn’t what I came
here to propose.”
“See, I’m glad I didn’t leave, this is just getting good,” said Elphaba, but clamped her lips shut

when they both glared at her.
“I came here to propose that we meet from time to time, that’s all,” said Boq. “That we meet as
friends. That, free of expectations, we come to know each other as dear friends. I do not deny that
you overwhelm me with your beauty. You are the moon in the season of shadowlight; you are the
fruit of the candlewood tree; you are the phoenix in circles of flight-“
“This sounds rehearsed,” said Elphaba.
“You are the mythical sea,” he concluded, all his eggs in one basket.
“I’m not much for poetry,” said Galinda. “But you’re very kind.” She had seemed to perk up a
little at the compliments. Anyway the fan was moving faster. “I don’t really understand the point of
friendship, as
you call it, Master Boq, between unmarried people of our age. It seems- distracting. I can see it
might lead to complications, especially as you confess to an infatuation I cannot hope to return. Not
in a million years.”
“It’s the age of daring,” said Boq. “It’s the only time we have. We must live in the present. We
are young and alive.”
“I don’t know if alive quite covers it,” said Elphaba. “This sounds scripted to me.”
Galinda rapped Elphaba on the head with her fan, which folded smartly up and opened just as
neatly again, an elegant practiced gesture that impressed all of them. “You’re being tiresome, Miss
Elphie. I appreciate your company but I didn’t request a running commentary. I’m perfectly capable
of deciding the merits of Master Boq’s recital myself. Let me consider his stupid idea. Lurline
above, I can hardly hear myself think!”
Losing her temper, Galinda was prettier than ever. So that old saw was true, too. Boq was
learning so much about girls! Her fan was dropping. Was that a good sign? If she hadn’t had some
affection for him, would she have worn a dress with a neckline that dipped just a tad lower than he
had dared hope? And there was the essence of rose water on her. He felt a surge of possibility, an
inclination to rub his lips on the place where her shoulder became her neck.
“Your merits,” she was saying. “Well, you’re brave, I suppose, and clever, to have figured this
out. If Madame Morrible ever found you here we’d be in severe trouble. Of course you might not
know that, so scratch the bravery part. Just clever. You’re clever and you’re sort of, oh, well, I mean
to look at-“
“Handsome?” suggested Elphaba. “Dashing?”
“You’re fun to look at,” decided Galinda.
Boq’s face fell. “Fun?” he said.
“I’d give a lot to achieve fun,” Elphaba said. “The best I usually hope for is stirring, and when
people say that they’re usually referring to digestion-“
“Well, I might be all or none of the things you say,” said Boq staunchly, “but you will learn that
I am persistent. I will not let you say no to our friendship, Galinda. It means too much to me.”
“Behold the male beast roaring in the jungle for his mate,” said Elphaba. “See how the female
beast giggles behind a shrub while she
organizes her face to say, Pardon dear, did you say something?”
“Elphaba!” they both cried at her.
“My word, duckie!” said a voice behind them, and all three turned. It was some middle-aged
minder in a striped apron, her thinning gray hair twisted in a knot on her head. “What are you getting
yourself up to?”
“Ama Clutch!” Galinda said. “How did you think to look for me here?”
“That Tsebra cook told me some yacky-yacky was going on out here. You think they’re blind in
there? Now who is this? This don’t look good at all, not to me.”

Boq stood. “I am Master Boq of Rush Margins, Munchkinland. I am nearly a third-year fellow
at Briscoe Hall.”
Elphaba yawned. “Is this show over?”
“Well, I am shocked! A guest don’t get shown into the vegetable garden, so I guess you arrived
uninvited! Sir, get yourself gone from here before I be calling the porters to remove you!”
“Oh, Ama Clutch, don’t make a scene,” said Galinda, sighing.
“He’s hardly developed enough to worry about,” pointed out Elphaba. “Look, he’s still
beardless. And from that we can deduce-“
Boq said in a rush, “Perhaps this is all wrong. I did not come here to be abused. Forgive me,
Miss Galinda, if I have failed even to amuse you. As for you, Miss Elphaba”-his voice was as cold
as he could make it, and that was colder than he’d ever heard it himself-“I was wrong to have trusted
in your compassion.”
“Wait and see,” said Elphaba. “Wrong takes an awful long time to be proven, in my experience.
Meanwhile, why don’t you come back sometime?”
“There is no second time to this,” said Ama Clutch, tugging at Galinda, who was proving as
sedentary as set cement. “Miss Elphaba, shame on you for encouraging this scandal.”
“Nothing here has been perpetrated but badinage, and bad badinage at that,” said Elphaba.
“Miss Galinda, you’re mighty stubborn there. You’re planting yourself in the vegetable garden for
good in the hopes that this Boy Visitation might occur again? Have we misread your interest?”
Galinda stood at last with some dignity. “My dear Master Boq,” she said, as if dictating, “it
was ever my intention to dissuade you from pursuing me, in romantic attachment or even in
friendship, as you put it. I had
not meant to bruise you. It is not in my nature.” At this Elphaba rolled her eyes, but for once
kept her mouth shut, perhaps because Ama Clutch had dug her fingernails into Elphaba’s elbow. “I
will not deign to arrange another meeting like this. As Ama Clutch reminds me, it is beneath me.”
Ama Clutch hadn’t exactly said that, but even so, she nodded grimly. “But if our paths cross in a
legitimate way, Master Boq, I will do you the courtesy at least of not ignoring you. I trust you will be
satisfied with that.”
“Never,” said Boq with a smile, “but it’s a start.”
“And now good evening,” said Ama Clutch on behalf of them all, and steered the girls away.
“Fresh dreams, Master Boq, and don’t come back!”
“Miss Elphie, you were horrible,” he heard Galinda say, while Elphaba twisted around and
waved good-bye with a grin he could not clearly read.
So the summer began. Since he passed the exams, Boq was free to plan one last year at Briscoe
Hall. Daily he hid himself over to the library at Three Queens, where under the watchful eye of a
titanic Rhinoceros, the head archival librarian, he sat cleaning old manuscripts that clearly weren’t
looked at more than once a century. When the Rhino was out of the room, he had flighty
conversations with the two boys on either side of him, classic Queens boys, full of gibbering gossip
and arcane references, teasing and loyal. He enjoyed them when they were in good spirits, and he
detested their sulks. Crope and Tibbett. Tibbett and Crope. Boq pretended confusion when they got
too arch or suggestive, which seemed to happen about once a week, but they backed off quickly. In
the afternoons they would all take their cheese sandwiches by the banks of the Suicide Canal and
watch the swans. The strong boys at crew, coursing up and down the canal for summer practice,
made Crope and Tibbett swoon and fall on their faces in the grass. Boq laughed at them, not
unkindly, and waited for fate to deliver Galinda back into his path.
It wasn’t too long a wait. About three weeks after their vegetable garden liaison, on a windy
summer morning, a small earthquake caused some minor damage in the Three Queens library, and the

building had to be closed for some patching. Tibbett, Crope, and Boq took their sandwiches, with
some beakers of tea from the buttery, and they flopped down
at their favorite place on the grassy banks of the canal. Fifteen minutes later, along came Ama
Clutch with Galinda and two other girls.
“I do believe we know you,” said Ama Clutch as Galinda stood demurely a step behind. In
cases such as these it was the servant’s duty to elicit names from the strangers in the group, so that
they might greet each other personally. Ama Clutch registered out loud that they were Masters Boq,
Crope, and Tibbett, meeting Misses Galinda, Shenshen, and Pfannee. Then Ama Clutch moved a few
feet away to allow the young people to address one another.
Boq leaped up and gave a small bow, and Galinda said, “As in line with my promise, Master
Boq, may I enquire how you’re keeping?”
“Very well, thank you,” said Boq.
“He’s ripe as a peach,” said Tibbett.
“He’s downright luscious, from this angle,” said Crope, sitting a few steps behind, but Boq
turned and glared so fiercely that Crope and Tibbett were chastened, and fell into a mock sulk.
“And you, Miss Galinda?” continued Boq, searching her well-composed face. “You are well?
How thrilling to see you in Shin for the summer.” But that wasn’t the right thing to say. The better
girls went home for the summer, and Galinda as a Gillikinese must feel it deeply that she was stuck
here, like a Munchkinlander or a commoner! The fan came up. The eyes went down. The Misses
Shenshen and Pfannee touched her shoulders in mute sympathy. But Galinda sallied on.
“My dear friends the Misses Pfannee and Shenshen are taking a house for the month of
Highsummer on the shores of Lake Chorge. A little fantasy house near the village of Neverdale. I’ve
decided to make my holiday there instead of taking that tiresome trek back to the Pertha Hills.”
“How refreshing.” He saw the beveled edges of her lacquered fingernails, the moth-colored
eyelashes, the glazed and buffed softness of cheek, the sensitive tuck of skin just at the cleft of her
upper lip. In the summer morning light, she was dangerously, inebriatingly magnified.
“Steady,” said Crope, and he and Tibbett jumped up and they each caught Boq by an elbow. He
then remembered to breathe. He couldn’t think of anything else to say though, and Ama Clutch was
turning her handbag around and around in her hand.
“So we’ve got jobs,” said Tibbett, to the rescue. “The Three Queens library. We’re
housekeeping the literature. We’re the cleaning maids of culture. Are you working, Miss Galinda?”
“I should think not,” said Galinda. “I need a rest from my studies. It has been a harrowing year,
harrowing. My eyes are still tired from reading.”
“How about you girls?” said Crope, outrageously casual. But they only giggled and demurred
and inched away. This was their friend’s encounter, not theirs. Boq, regaining his composure, could
feel the group beginning to shift itself into motion again. “And Miss Elphie?” he enquired, to hold
them there. “How is your roomie?”
“Headstrong and difficult,” said Galinda severely, for the first time speaking in a normal voice,
not the faint social whisper. “But, thank Lurline, she’s got a job, so I get some relief. She’s working
in the lab and the library under our Doctor Dillamond. Do you know of him?”
“Doctor Dillamond? Do I know of him?” said Boq. “He’s the most impressive biology tutor in
Shiz.”
“By the by,” said Galinda, “he’s a Goat.”
“Yes, yes. I wish he would teach us. Even our professors acknowledge his prominence.
Apparently, years ago, back in the reign of the
Regent, and before, he used to be invited annually to lecture at Briscoe
Hall. But the restrictions changed even that, so I’ve never really met him.

Just to see him at that poetry evening, last year, so briefly, was a treat-“
“Well he does go on,” said Galinda. “Brilliant he may be, but he has no sense of when he’s
become tedious. Anyway, Miss Elphie’s hard at work, doing something or other. She will go on
about it, too. I think it’s contagious!”
“Well, a lab, it breeds things,” said Crope.
“Yes,” said Tibbett, “and incidentally may I add that you’re every bit as lovely as Boq gushes
you are. We’d put it down to an overactive imagination born of affectional and physical frustration-“
“You know,” said Boq, “between your Miss Elphie and my erstwhile friends here, we have no
real hope of friendship at all. Shall we organize a duel and kill each other instead? Count off ten
paces, turn and shoot? It would save so much bother.”
But Galinda didn’t approve of such joking. She nodded in a dismissive way, and the group of
females moved out along the graveled path, following the curve of the canal. Miss Shenshen was
heard to say in a deep, breathy voice, “Oh, my dear, he is sweet, in a toylike way.”
The voice faded out, Boq turned to rail at Crope and Tibbett, but they fell to tickling him and
they all collapsed in a heap on the remains of their lunch. And since there was no hope in changing
them, Boq abandoned the impulse to correct his friends. Really, what difference did their callow
banter make if Miss Galinda found him so impossible?
A week or two later, on his afternoon off, Boq took himself in to Railway Square. He lingered
at a kiosk, staring. Cigarettes, ersatz love charms, naughty drawings of women undressing, and
scrolls painted with lurid sunsets, overladen with one-line inspirational slogans. “Lurline Lives on
Within Each Heart.” “Safe Keep the Wizard’s Laws, and the Wizard’s Laws Will Keep You Safe.”
“I Pray to the Unnamed God That Justice Will Walk Abroad in Oz.” Boq noted the variety: the
pagan, the authoritarian, and the old-fashioned unionist impulses.
But nothing directly sympathetic to the royalists, who had gone underground in the sixteen harsh
years since the Wizard had first wrested power from the Ozma Regent. The Ozma line had been
Gillikinese originally, and surely there were active pockets of resistance to the Wizard? But Gillikin
had, in fact, thrived under the Wizard, so the royalists kept mum. Besides, everyone had heard the
rumors of strict court action against turncoats and peristrophists.
Boq bought a broadsheet published out of the Emerald City-several weeks old, but it was the
first he’d seen in some time-and he settled down at a cafe. He read about the Emerald City Home
Guard suppressing some Animal dissenters, who were making a nuisance of themselves in the palace
gardens. He looked for news of the provinces, and found a filler about Munchkinland, which
continued experiencing near-drought conditions; occasional thunderbursts would drench the ground,
but the water would run off or sink uselessly into the clay. They said that hidden subterranean lakes
underlay the Vinkus region, that water resources there could serve the whole of Oz. But the idea of a
canal system across the entire country made everyone laugh. The expense! There was great
disagreement between the Eminences and the Emerald City as to what was to be done.
Secession, thought Boq seditiously, and looked up to see Uphaba, alone, without even a nanny
or Ama, standing over him.
“What a delicious expression you have on your face, Boq,” she said. “It’s much more
interesting than love.”
“It is love, in a way,” said Boq, then remembered himself, and leaped to his feet. “Won’t you
join me? Please, take a seat. Unless you’re worried about being unchaperoned.”
She sat down, looking a bit etiolated, and allowed him to call for a cup of mineral tea. She had
a parcel in brown paper and string under her arm. “A few trinkets for my sister,” she said. “She’s
like Miss Galinda, she loves the fancy outside of things. I found a Vinkus shawl in the bazaar, red
roses on a black background, with black and green fringe. I’m sending it to her, and a pair of striped

stockings that Ama Clutch knitted for me.”
“I didn’t know you had a sister,” he said. “Was she in the play group we were in together?”
“She’s three years younger,” Elphaba said. “She’ll come to Crage Hall before long.”
“Is she as difficult as you are?”
“She’s difficult in a different way. She’s crippled, pretty severely, is my Nessarose, so she’s a
handful. Even Madame Morrible doesn’t quite know the extent of it. But by then I’ll be a third-year
girl and will have the nerve to stand up to the Head, I guess. If anything gives me nerve, it’s people
making life hard for Nessarose. Life is already hard enough for her.”
“Is your mama raising her?”
“My mother is dead. My father is in charge, nominally.”
“Nominally?”
“He’s religious,” said Elphaba, and made the circling palms gesture that indicated you could
grind millstone against millstone all you liked, but there wasn’t any quern in the land that could
produce flour if there was no grain to grind.
“It sounds very hard for you all. How did your mama die?”
“She died in childbirth, and this is the end of the personal interview.”
“Tell me about Doctor Dillamond. I hear you’re working for him.”
“Tell me about your amusing campaign for the heart of Galinda the Ice Queen.”
Boq really wanted to hear about Doctor Dillamond, but was derailed by Elphaba’s remark. “I
will keep on, Elphie, I will! When I see her I’m so smitten with longing, it’s like fire in my veins. I
can’t speak, and the things I think about are like visions. It’s like dreaming. It’s like floating in your
dreams.”
“I don’t dream.”
“Tell me, is there any hope? What does she say? Does she ever even imagine that her feelings
for me might change?”
Elphaba sat with her two elbows on the table, her hands clasped in front of her face, her two
forefingers leaning against each other and against her thin, grayish lips. “You know, Boq,” she said,
“the thing is I have become fond of Galinda myself. Behind her starry-eyed love of herself there is a
mind struggling to work. She does think about things. When her mind is really working, she could, if
led, think on you-even, I suspect, somewhat fondly. I suspect. I don’t know. But when she slides back
into herself, I mean into the girl who spends two hours a day curling that beautiful hair, it’s as if the
thinking Galinda goes into some internal closet and shuts the door. Or as if she’s in hysterical retreat
from things that are too big for her. I love her both ways, but I find it odd. I wouldn’t mind leaving
myself behind if I could, but I don’t know the way out.”
“I propose you’re being hard on her, and you’re certainly too forward,” said Boq sternly.
“Were she sitting here I think she’d be astounded to hear you speak so freely.”
“I’m just trying to behave as I think a friend should behave. Granted, I haven’t had much
practice.”
“Well, I question your friendship with me, If you consider Miss Galinda your friend too, and if
that’s how you tear a friend apart in her absence.”
Though Boq was irritated, he found that this was a more lively discussion than the conventional
patter he and Galinda had so far exchanged. He didn’t want to burn Elphaba off with criticism. “I’m
ordering you another mineral tea,” he said, in an authoritative voice, his father’s voice in fact, “and
then you can tell me about Doctor Dillamond.”
“Skip the tea, I’m still nursing this one and you have no more money than I do, I bet,” said
Elphaba, “but I’ll tell you about Doctor Dillamond. Unless you are too affronted at the slice and
angle of my opinions.”

“Please, perhaps I am wrong,” said Boq. “Look, it’s a nice day, we’re both off the campus.
How do you come to be out alone, by the way? Is your escape sanctioned by Madame Morrible?”
“Take a guess about that,” she said, “Once it was clear that you could come and go from Crage
Hall by way of the vegetable garden and the roof of the adjacent stable, I decided I could too. I’m
never missed.”
“That’s hard for me to believe,” said he, daringly, “for you’re not the kind who blends into the
woodwork. Now tell me about Doctor Dillamond. He’s my Idol.”
She sighed, and set the package down on the table at last, and settled in for a long chat. She told
him about Doctor Dillamond’s work in natural essences, trying to determine by scientific method
what the real differences were between animal and Animal tissue, and between Animal and human
tissue. The literature on the matter, she had learned from doing the legwork herself, was all couched
in unionist terms, and pagan terms before that, and they didn’t hold up to scientific scrutiny. “Don’t
forget Shiz University was originally a unionist monastery,” said Elphaba, “so despite the anythinggoes attitude among the educated elite, there are still bedrocks of unionist bias.”
“But I’m a unionist,” said Boq, “and I don’t see the conflict. The Unnamed God is
accommodating to many ranges of being, not just human. Are you talking about a subtle bias against
Animals, interwoven into early unionist tracts, and still in operation today?”
“That’s certainly what Doctor Dillamond thinks. And he’s a unionist himself. Explain that
paradox and I’d be glad to convert. I admire the Goat intensely. But the real interest of it to me is the
political slant. If he can isolate some bit of the biological architecture to prove that there isn’t any
difference, deep down in the invisible pockets of human and Animal flesh-that there’s no difference
between us-or even among us, if you take in animal flesh too-well, you see the implications.”
“No,” said Boq, “I don’t think I do.”
“How can the Banns on Animal Mobility be upheld if Doctor Dillamond can prove,
scientifically, that there isn’t any inherent difference between humans and Animals?”
“Oh, now that’s a blueprint for an impossibly rosy future,” said Boq.
“Think about it,” said Elphaba. “Think, Boq. On what grounds could the Wizard possibly
continue to publish those Banns?”
“How could he be persuaded not to? The Wizard has dissolved the Hall of Approval
indefinitely. I don’t believe, Elphie, that the Wizard is open to entertaining arguments, even by as
august an Animal as Doctor Dillamond.”
“But of course he must be. He’s a man in power, it’s his job to consider changes in knowledge.
When Doctor Dillamond has his proof, he’ll write to the Wizard and begin to lobby for change. No
doubt he’ll do his best to let Animals the land over know what he’s intending, too. He isn’t a fool.”
“Well I didn’t say he was a fool,” said Boq. “But how close do you think he is to getting firm
evidence?”
“I am a student handmaid,” said Elphaba. “I don’t even understand what he means. I’m only a
secretary, an amanuensis-you know he can’t write things himself, he can’t manage a pen with his
hoofs. I take dictation and I file and I dash to the Crage Hall library and look things up.”
“Briscoe Hall library would be a better place to hunt for that kind of material,” said Boq.
“Even Three Queens, where I work this summer, has stacks of documents from the monks’
observations of animal and vegetable life.”
“I know I am not traditionally presented,” said Elphaba, “but I believe on the grounds of being a
girl I am excluded from the Briscoe Hall library. And on the grounds of being an Animal so too, now
at least, is Doctor Dillamond. So those valuable resources are off limits to us.”
“Well,” said Boq carelessly, “if you knew exactly what you wanted . I have access to the stacks
in both collections.”

“And when the good Doctor is finished ferreting out the difference between Animals and
people, I will propose he apply the same arguments to the differences between the sexes,” said
Elphaba. Then she registered what Boq had said, and stretched out her hand, almost as if to touch
him. “Oh Boq. Boq. On behalf of Doctor Dillamond, I accept your generous offer of help. I’ll get the
first list of sources to you within the week. Just leave my name out of it. I don’t care so much about
incurring Horrible Morrible’s wrath against myself, but I don’t want her taking out her annoyance on
my sister, Nessarose.”
She downed the last of her tea, gathered her parcel, and had sprung up almost before Boq could
pull himself to his feet. Various customers, lingering over their elevenses with their own broadsheets
or novellas, looked up at the ungainly girl pushing out the doors. As Boq settled back down, hardly
yet registering what he had gotten himself into, he realized, slowly but thoroughly, that this morning
there were no Animals taking their morning tea in here. No Animals at all.
In years to come-and Boq would live a long life-he would remember the rest of the summer as
scented with the must of old books, when ancient script swam before his eyes. He sleuthed alone in
the musty stacks, he hovered over the mahogany drawers lined with vellum manuscripts. All season
long, it seemed, the lozenge-paned windows between bluestone mullions and transoms misted over
again and again with flecks of small but steady rain, almost as brittle and pesky as sand. Apparently
the rain never made it as far as Munchkinland-but Boq tried not to think about that.
Crope and Tibbett were coerced into researching for Doctor Dillamond, too. At first they had to
be dissuaded from going about their forays in costumes of disguise-fake pince-nez, powdered wigs,
cloaks with high collars, all to be found in the well-stocked locker of the Three Queens Student
Theatrical and Terpsichorean Society. But when convinced of the seriousness of the mission, they
fell to with gusto. Once a week they met Boq and Elphaba in the cafe in Railway Square. Elphaba
showed up, during these misty weeks, entirely swathed in a brown cloak with a hood and veil that
hid all but her eyes. She wore long, frayed gray gloves that she boasted buying secondhand from a
local undertaker, cheap for having been used in funeral services. She sheathed her bamboo-pole legs
in a double thickness of cotton stocking. The first time Boq saw Elphaba like this, he said, “I just
barely manage to convince Crope and Tibbett to lose the espionage drag, and you come in looking
like the original Kumbric Witch.”
“I don’t dress for your approval, boys,” she said, shucking her cloak and folding it inside out so
that the wet wool never touched her. On the
occasion when another care patron would come through, shaking water off an umbrella,
Elphaba always recoiled, flinching if she was caught by even a scattering of drops.
“Is that religious conviction, Elphie, that you keep yourself so dry?” said Boq.
“I’ve told you before, I don’t comprehend religion, although conviction is a concept I’m
beginning to get. In any case, someone with a real religious conviction is, I propose, a religious
convict, and deserves locking up.”
“Hence,” observed Crope, “your aversion to all water. Without your knowing it, it might be a
baptismal splash, and then your liberty as a free-range agnostic would be curtailed.”
“I thought you were too self-absorbed to notice my spiritual pathology,” said Elphaba. “Now,
boys, what’ve we got today?”
Every time, Boq thought: Would that Galinda were here. For the casual camaraderie that grew
up among them during these weeks was so refreshing-a model of ease and even wit. Against
convention they had dropped the honorifics. They interrupted one another and laughed and felt bold
and important because of the secrecy of their mission. Crope and Tibbett cared little about Animals
or the Banns-they were both Emerald City boys, sons, respectively, of a tax collector and of a palace
security advisor-but Elphaba’s passionate belief in the work enlivened them. Boq himself grew more

involved, too. He imagined Galinda drawing her chair up with them, losing her upper-crust reserve,
allowing her eyes to glow with a shared and secret purpose.
“I thought I knew all the shapes of passion,” Elphaba said one bright afternoon. “I mean,
growing up with a unionist minister for a father. You come to expect that theology is the fundament
on which all other thought and belief is based. But boys!-this week, Doctor Dillamond made some
sort of a scientific breakthrough. I’m not sure what it was, but it involved manipulating lenses, a pair
of them, so he could peer at bits of tissue that he had laid on a transparent glass and backlit by
candlelight. He began to dictate, and he was so excited that he sang his findings; he composed arias
out of what he was seeing! Recitatives about structure, about color, about the basic shapes of organic
life. He has a horrible sandpapery voice, as you might imagine for a Goat;
but how he warbled! Tremolo on the annotations, vibrato on the interpretations, and sostenuto
on the implications: long, triumphant open vowels of discovery! I was sure someone would hear. I
sang with him, I read his notes back to him like a student of musical composition.”
The good Doctor was emboldened by his findings, and he required that their digging become
more and more focused. He did not want to announce any breakthroughs until he had figured out the
most politically advantageous way to present them. Toward the end of the summer the push was on to
find Lurlinist and early unionist disquisitions on how the Animals and the animals had been created
and differentiated. “It’s not a matter of uncovering a scientific theory by a prescientific company of
unionist monks or pagan priests and priestesses,” explained Elphaba. “But Doctor Dillamond wants
to authenticate the way our ancestors thought about this. The Wizard’s right to impose unjust laws
may be better challenged if we know how the old codgers explained it to themselves.”
It was an interesting exercise.
“In one form or another, we all know some of the origin myths that predate the Oziad,” said
Tibbett, throwing his blond bangs back with a theatrical flourish. “The most coherent one has our
dear putative Fairy Queen Lurline on a voyage. She was tired of travel in the air. She stopped and
called from the desert sands a font of water hidden deep beneath the earth’s dry dunes. The water
obeyed, in such abundance that the land of Oz in all its febrile variety sprang up almost instantly.
Lurline drank herself into a stupor and went for a long rest on the top of Mount Runcible. When she
awoke, she relieved herself copiously, and this became the Gillikin River, running around the vast
tracts of the Great Gillikin Forest and skirting through the eastern edges of the Vinkus, and coming to
a stop at Restwater. The animals were terricolous and thus of a lower order than Lurline and her
retinue. Don’t look at me like that, I know what that word means-I looked it up. It means living on or
near the ground.
“The animals had come into their being as rolled clots of earth dislodged from the exuberant
plant growth. When Lurline let loose, the animals thought the raging stream was a flood, sent to
drown their fresh new world, and they despaired of their existence. In a panic they flung themselves
into the torrent and attempted to swim through Lurline’s urine. Those who became intimidated and
turned back remained animals,
beasts of burden, slaughtered for flesh, hunted for fun, counted as profit, admired as innocent.
Those who swam on and made it to the farther shore were given the gifts of consciousness and
language.”
“What a gift, to be able to imagine your own death,” muttered Crope.
“Thus, Animals. Convention, as long ago as history can remember, divides the animals and
Animals.”
“Baptism by piss,” said Elphaba. “Is that a subtle way both to explain the talents of Animals
and to denigrate them at the same time?”
“And what of the animals who drowned?” asked Boq. “They must have been the real losers.”

“Or the martyrs.”
“Or the ghosts who live underground now and stop up the water supply so the fields of
Munchkinland dry up today.”
They all laughed and had more tea brought to the table.
“I’ve found some later scriptures with a more unionist slant,” Boq said. “They tell a story that I
guess would be derived from the pagan narrative, but it has been cleaned up some. The flood,
occurring sometime after creation and before the advent of humankind, wasn’t a massive piss by
Lurline, but the sea of tears wept by the Unnamed God on the god’s only visit to Oz. The Unnamed
God perceived the sorrow that would overwhelm the land throughout time, and bawled in pain. The
whole of Oz was a mile deep in saltwater tides. The animals kept afloat by means of the odd log, the
uprooted tree. Those who swallowed enough of the tears of the Unnamed God were imbued with a
fulsome sympathy for their kin, and they began to construct rafts from the flotsam. They saved their
kind out of mercy, and from their kindness they became a new, sentient lot: the Animals.”
“Another kind of baptism, from within,” said Tibbett. “Ingestion. I like it.”
“But what of the pleasure faith?” said Crope. “Can a witch or a sorcerer take an animal and,
through a spell, create an Animal?”
“Well, that’s the thing I’ve been looking into,” said Elphaba. “The pleasure fathers-the fatherssay that if anything-Lurline or the Unnamed God-could have done it once, magic could do it again.
They even hint that the original distinction between Animals and animals was a Kumbric Witch
spell, so strong and enduring it has never worn off. This
a thing as a Kumbric Witch, let alone if there ever was. Myself, I think it’s
a part of the Lurlinist cycle that’s gotten detached and developed independently. Arrant
nonsense. We have no proof that magic is so strong-“
“We have no proof that god is so strong,” interrupted Tibbett.
“Which strikes me as being as good an argument against god as it is against magic,” said
Elphaba, “but never mind that. The point is, if it is an enduring Kumbric spell, centuries old, it may
be reversible. Or it may be perceived to be reversible, which is just as bad. In the interim, while
sorcerers are at work experimenting with charms and spells, the Animals lose their rights, one by
one. Just slowly enough so that it’s hard to see as a coherent political campaign. It’s a dicey
scenario, and one that Doctor Dillamond hasn’t figured out-“
At this point Elphaba hitched the loose part of her cloak up over her head, and disappeared into
the shadows of Its folds. “What?” said Boq, but she put a finger to her lips. Crope and Tibbett, as if
on cue, launched into some silly banter about their professional goals of being abducted by pirates of
the desert and made to dance the fandango dressed only in slave shackles. Boq saw nothing amiss: A
couple of clerks reading the racing forms, some genteel ladies with their lemonades and novellas, a
tiktok creature buying coffee beans by the pound, a parody of an old professor figuring out some
theorem by arranging and rearranging some sugar cubes along the edge of his butter knife.
A few minutes later, Elphaba relaxed. “That tiktok thing works at Crage Hall. I think it’s called
Grommetik. Usually it shadows Madame Morrible like a lovesick puppy. I don’t think it saw me.”
But she was too jittery to continue the conversation, and after she made sure their next
assignments were clear, the crew disbanded into the misty streets.
Two weeks before Briscoe Hall reconvened for the new semester, Avaric returned from his
home, the seat of the Margreave of Tenmeadows. He was bronzed with summer leisure and eager for
fun. He mocked Boq for having struck up friendships with boys from Three
Queens, and under other circumstances Boq would probably have let his new alliance with
Crope and Tibbett lapse. But they were all engaged in Doctor Dillamond’s research now, and Boq
just put up with Avaric’s taunting.

Elphaba remarked one day that she had had a letter from Galinda, away with her friends on
Lake Chorge. “Can you believe it, she proposed I take a coach and come visit for a weekend,” said
Elphaba. “She must really be bored out of her mind with those society girls.”
“But she’s society herself, how could she be bored?” asked Boq.
“Don’t ask me to explain the nuances of that circle,” said Elphaba, “but I suspect that our Miss
Galinda isn’t quite as society as she makes out.”
“Well, Elphie, when are you going?” asked Boq.
“Never,” said Elphaba. “This work is too important.”
“Let me see the letter.”
“I don’t have it.”
“Bring it to me.”
“What are you on about?”
“Maybe she needs you. She always seems to need you.”
“She needs me?” Elphaba laughed, coarsely, loudly. “Well I know you’re besotted and I feel
somewhat responsible. I’ll show you the letter next week. But I’m not going to go just to give you a
vicarious thrill, Boq. Friend or no friend.”
The next week she unfolded the letter.
My dear Miss Elphaba,
I am bade to write to you by my hostesses the Misses Pfannee of Pfann Hall and Shenshen of the
Minkos Clan. We are having a lovely summer at Lake Chorge. The air is calm and sweet and all is
as pleasant as anything. If you would like to visit us for three or four days before school begins, we
know you have been hard at work all summer and so. A little change. If you would like to come no
need to write if you would like to visit. Just arrive by coach at Neverdale and come by foot or hire a
hansom cab, it’s just a mile or two by the bridge. The house is dear, covered in roses and ivy, it s
called the Caprice-in-the-Pines. Who wouldn’t love it here! I do hope you can come! I do very
specially hope so for reasons I dare not write. I cannot advise you as to chaperones as .Alina
Clutch is already here and so is Ama and Ama Vimp. You can decide. We hope for long hours of
amusing conversation. Ever your loving friend,
Miss Galinda
of the Arduennas of the Upland
33 Highsummer, midday
at “Caprice-in-the-Pines”
“But you must go!” Boq cried. “Look how she writes to you!”
“She writes like someone who doesn’t write very often,” Elphaba observed.
“I do hope you can come!’ she says. She needs you, Elphie. I insist that you go!”
“Oh you do? Why don’t you go then?” said Elphaba.
“I hardly can go without having been invited.”
“Well that’s easy enough. I’ll write and tell her to invite you.” Elphaba reached for a pencil in
her pocket.
“Don’t patronize me, Miss Elphaba,” said Boq sternly. “This must be taken seriously.”
“You are lovesick and deluded,” said Elphaba. “And I don’t like your retreating back to ‘Miss
Elphaba’ to punish me for disagreeing with you. Besides, I can’t go. I have no chaperone.”
“I’ll be your chaperone.”
“Hah! As if Madame Morrible would allow that!”
“Well-how about”-Boq tossed it around-“how about my friend Avaric? He’s the son of a
margreave. He’s spotless by virtue of his station. Even Madame Momble would quail before a
margreave’s son.”

“Madame Morrible wouldn’t quail before a hurricane. Besides, have you no concern for me? I
don’t feel like traveling with this Avaric.”
“Elphie,” said Boq, “you owe me. I’ve been helping you out all summer, and I’ve had Crope
and Tibbett helping too. Now you have to pay me back. You ask Doctor Dillamond for a few days
off, and I’ll ask Avaric, who is bursting to do something. The three of us will go to Lake Chorge.
Avaric and I will rent a room in an inn, and we’ll stay a very short time. Just long enough to make
sure that Miss Galinda is all right.”
“It’s you I’m worried about, not her,” said Elphaba, and Boq could see that he had won.
Madame Momble would not release Elphaba in the care of Avaric. “Your dear father would
never forgive me,” she said. “But I am not the Horrible Morrible you think of me. Oh yes, I know
your little pet names for me, Miss Elphaba. Amusing and juvenile! I am concerned for your welfare.
And with all your hard work all summer, I see that you have grown, oh, shall we say, verdigrisian?
So I shall make a compromise proposal. Provided that you can convince Master Avaric and Master
Boq to travel with you and my own little Grommetik, whom I will loan in your care and to care for
you, I shall permit your little summer fun.”
Elphaba, Boq, and Avaric rode in the coach, and Grommetik was made to ride on top with the
luggage. Elphaba met Boq’s eyes from time to time, grimacing, but she ignored Avaric, to whom she
had taken an instant dislike.
When he had finished with the pages of his racing form, Avaric teased Boq about this trip. “I
should have known when I left for the summer that you were mooning about in the throes of love!
You developed this serious set of chin, it misled me. I thought it was consumption at least. You
should have come out with me that night before I left! A visit to the Philosophy Club would have
been just what the doctor ordered.”

Boq was mortified to have such a dive mentioned in the presence of a female. But Elphaba
seemed to take no offense. Perhaps she didn’t know what it was. He tried to steer Avaric away from
the subject.
“You don’t know Miss Galinda, but you will find her charming,” he said. “I guarantee that.”
And she will probably find you charming, he thought, a bit late in the day. But he was even willing to
live with that, if it was the price of helping Galinda out of a tricky situation.
Avaric was regarding Elphaba with contempt. “Miss Elphaba,” he said formally, “does your
name imply any elf blood in your background?”
“What a novel idea,” said Elphaba. “If there were, I suppose my limbs would be as brittle as
uncooked pasta, and come apart with the slightest of pressure. Would you care to apply some force?”
She proffered a forearm, green as a spring limeberry. “Do, I beg you, so we can settle this question
for once, for all. We shall conclude that the relative force you need to break my arm-as opposed to
other arms you have broken-is proportionate to the relative amount of human versus elfin blood in
my veins.”
“I certainly will not touch you,” said Avaric, managing to say many things at once.
“The elf in the self regrets,” said Elphaba. “Were you to have dismembered me, I might have
been posted back to Shin in small pieces and been spared the tedium of this forced holiday. And this
company.”
“Oh, Elphie.” Boq sighed. “This isn’t a good start, you know.”
“I think it’s swell,” said Avaric, glaring.
“I didn’t think friendship required this much,” snapped Elphaba to Boq. “I was better off
before.”
It was late afternoon by the time they arrived in Neverdale and settled at the inn, and made their
way by foot along the lake to Caprice-in-the-Pines.
Two older women were in the sunlight by the portico, shelling string beans and wristwrenchers.
The one Boq recognized was Ama Clutch, Galinda’s chaperone; the other must be the minder of
Miss Shenshen or Miss Pfannee. They started at the sight of the procession coming up the drive, and
Ama Clutch leaned forward, the string beans spilling out of her lap. “Well, I never,” she said as they
drew near, “it’s Miss Elphie herself. My uncle’s whiskers. I never did.” She pulled herself to her
feet and clasped Elphaba into her arms. Elphaba stood as stiff as a plaster figure.
“Give us a minute to be catching our breath, duckies,” said Ama Clutch. “Whatever in the
blameless heaven are you doing here, Miss Elphaba? It don’t seem possible.”
“I have been invited by Miss Galinda,” said Elphaba, “and my fellow travelers here insisted
they wanted to accompany me. So I find myself compelled to accept.”
“I know nothing of this,” said Ama Clutch. “Miss Elphaba, let me take that heavy reticule and
find you something clean to put on. You must be frayed from the voyage. You gentlemen will be
staying in the village, of course. But for now, the girls are in the summerhouse at the edge of the
lake.”
The travelers made their way along a path interrupted with stone steps at the steeper parts.
Grommetik took longer at steps and was left behind, and no one was inclined to stay and lend a hand
to a figure with such a hard skin and clockwork thoughts. Skirting the final growth of holly flight
bushes, they came upon the gazebo.
It was a skeleton house of unstripped logs, six sides open to the breezes, with a fretwork of
arabesquing twigs, and Lake Chorge a mighty field of blue beyond. The girls were sitting on steps
and in wicker chairs, and Ama Clipp was lost in some small work involving three needles and many
colors of thread.
“Miss Galinda!” broke out Boq, needing his to be the first voice heard.

The girls raised their heads. In evanescent summer frocks, free of hoops and bustles, they
looked like birds about to scatter.
“Holy terror!” said Galinda, her jaw dropping. “What’re you doing here!”
“I’m not decent!” shrieked Shenshen, drawing attention to her unshod feet and pale exposed
ankles.
Pfannee bit one corner of her lip and tried to revise her smirk into a smile of welcome.
“I am not staying for long,” said Elphaba. “By the way, girls, this is
Master Avaric, the Margreave Descending from Tenmeadows, Gillikin.
And this is Master Boq from Munchkinland. They’re both at Briscoe
Hall. Master Avaric, as if you can’t tell by the lovesick expression in Boq’s
face, this is Miss Galinda of the Arduennas, and Miss Shenshen and Miss
Pfannee, who can outline their own pedigrees perfectly well.”
“But how enchanting, and how naughty,” said Miss Shenshen. “Miss Elphaba who-never-givesus-the-time-of-day, you have redeemed yourself for all time by this pleasant surprise. How do you
do, gentlemen.”
“But,” stammered Galinda, “but why are you here? What’s wrong?”
“I am here because I stupidly mentioned your invitation to Master Boq, who saw it as a sign
from the Unnamed God that we should visit.,’
But at this Miss Pfannee could control herself no longer, and fell on the floor of the gazebo,
writhing in laughter. “What,” said Shenshen, “what?”
“But what invitation are you talking about?” asked Galinda.
“I don’t need to show you,” said Elphaba. For the first time since Boq had known her, she
looked confused. “Surely I don’t need to bring it out-“
“I believe I have been set up to be mortified,” said Galinda, glaring at the helpless Pfannee. “I
am being humiliated for sport. This is not funny, Miss Pfannee! I have half a mind to-to kick you!”
Just then Grommetik made it around the edge of the holly flight bush. The sight of the stupid
copper thing teetering on the edge of a stone step made Shenshen collapse against a column and join
Pfannee in uncontrollable laughter. Even Ama Clipp smiled to herself as she began to put away her
materials.
“But what is going on?” said Elphaba.
“Were you born to plague me?” Galinda said tearfully to her roomie. “Did I ask for your
association?”
“Don’t,” said Boq. “Don’t, Miss Galinda, please don’t say another word. You’re upset.”
“I-wrote-the-letter,” heaved Pfannee between her gales of laughter. Avaric began to chuckle,
and Elphaba’s eyes went wide and a little unfocused.
“You mean you didn’t write to invite me to visit here?” said Elphaba to Galinda.
“Oh, dear no, I did not,” said Galinda. In her anger she was beginning to regain some control,
even though, Boq guessed, damage had been done for good. “My darling Miss Elphaba, I wouldn’t
have dreamed of exposing you to such thoughtless cruelties as these girls perpetrate on each other
and on me for sheer amusement. Besides, you have no place In a setting like this.”
“But I’ve been invited,” said Elphaba. “Miss Pfannee, you wrote that letter instead of Miss
Galinda?”
“You ate it up!” chortled Pfannee.
“Well this is your home and I accept your invitation even if it was written under false
pretenses,” Elphaba said, her voice evenly matter-of-fact as she stared into Miss Pfannee’s
narrowed eyes. “I’ll go up and unpack my bags.”
She strode away. Only Grommetik followed. The air went stale with things unsaid. By and by

Pfannee’s hysteria grew quieter, and she merely snorted and wheezed, and then grew still, lying
vaporishly and unkempt on the flagstone floor of the gazebo.
“Well you all needn’t pierce me with your sniffy attitudes,” she said at last. “It was a joke.”
Elphaba stayed in her room for a day. Galinda came and went with a dinner. On occasion she
would stay for a few minutes. So the boys took to swimming and rowing on the lake with the girls.
Boq tried to fan in himself an interest in Shenshen or Pfannee, who certainly were coquettish enough.
But they both seemed besotted with Avaric.
At last Boq cornered Galinda on the porch and pleaded with her to talk with him. She agreed, a
measure of her demure demeanor returning, and they sat a short distance apart on a swing. “I suppose
I’m to blame for not seeing through that ruse,” said Boq. “Elphie wasn’t inclined to accept that
invitation. I made her.”
“What is this Elphie?” said Galinda. “Where has propriety gone this summer, I ask you?”
“We’ve become friends.”
“Well, I can promise to have gathered that. Why did you make her accept an invitation? Didn’t
you know I’d never write such a thing?”
“How should I know that? You’re her roomie.”
“By executive order of Madame Momble, not by choice! I care to have that remembered!”
“I didn’t know. You seem to get along.”
She sniffed, and curled a lip, but it seemed to be a remark to herself.
Boq continued, “If you’ve been woefully humiliated, why don’t you leave?”
“Perhaps I shall,” she said. “I’m considering. Elphaba says that to leave is to admit defeat. Yet
if she comes out of her hiding and begins to trip along with the rest of you-and me-the joke will be
unbearable. They don’t like her,” she explained.
“Well neither do you, I’d say!” said Boq, in an explosive whisper.
“It’s different, I have a right and a reason,” she retorted. “I am forced to put up with her! And
all because my stupid Ama stepped on a rusty nail in the railway station in Frottica and missed the
orientation! My whole academic career up in smoke because of my Ama’s carelessness! When I’m a
sorcerer I’ll have my revenge on her for that!”
“You could say that Elphaba brought us together,” said Boq softly. “I’m closer to her and so I’m
closer to you.”
Galinda seemed to give up. She leaned her head back on the velvet cushions of the swing and
said, “Boq, you know despite myself I think you’re a little sweet. You’re a little sweet and you’re a
little charming and you’re a little maddening and you’re a little habit-forming.”
Boq held his breath.
“But you’re little!” she concluded. “You’re a Munchkin, for god’s sake!” He kissed her, he
kissed her, he kissed her, little by little by little.
The next day Elphaba, Galinda, Boq, and Grommetik-and of course Ama Clutch-made the sixhour trip back to Shin with fewer than a dozen remarks among them. Avaric stayed behind to disport
himself with Pfannee and Shenshen. The pestering rain took up at the outskirts of Shin, and the august
facades of Crage Hall and Briscoe Hall were nearly obliterated with mist by the time they were, at
last, home.
Boq didn’t have time or inclination to remark on his romance when he saw Crope and Tibbett.
The Rhino librarian, having paid scant attention to the boys or their progress all summer, had
suddenly cot-toned on to how little had been achieved, and was all rheumatic buffs and watchful
eyes. The boys chattered little, they brushed and cleaned vellum and rubbed finfoot oil on leather
bindings and polished brass clasps. Only a few days left of this tedium.
One afternoon Boq let his eye drift down the codex he was handling. Usually he worked without

attention to the subject matter of the materials, but his eye was drawn to the bright red paint applied
in the illustration. It was a picture-maybe four, five hundred years old?–of a Kumbric Witch. Some
monk’s visionary zeal or anxiety about magic had inspired his brush. The Witch stood on an isthmus
connecting two rocky lands, and on either side of her stretched patches of cerulean blue sea, with
white-lipped waves of astonishing vigor and particularity. The Witch held in her hands a beast of
unrecognizable species, though it was clearly drowned, or nearly drowned. She cradled it in an arm
that, without attention to actual skeletal flexibility, lovingly encircled the beast’s wet, spiky-furred
back. With her other hand she was freeing a breast from her robe, offering suck to the creature. Her
expression was hard to read, or had the monk’s hand smudged, or age and grime bestowed a sfumato
sympathy? She was nearly motherly, with miserable child. Her look was inward, or sad, or
something. But her feet didn’t match her expression, for they were planted on the narrow strand with
prehensile grip, apparent even through the silver-colored shoes, whose coin-of-the-realm brilliance
had first caught Boq’s eye. Furthermore, the feet were turned out at ninety-degree angles to the shins.
They showed in profile as mirror images, heels clicked together and toes pointing in opposite
directions, like a stance in ballet. The gown was a hazy dawn blue. He guessed by the jeweled tones
of the work that the document hadn’t been opened in centuries.
Dramatically, or theologically, this image seemed some sort of a hybrid of the creation myths of
the Animals. Here were the flood waters, whether they derived from legends of Lurline or the
Unnamed God, whether they were rising or sinking. Was the Kumbric Witch interfering with or
accomplishing the ordained fate of the beasts? Though in a script too crabbed and archaic for Boq to
decipher, perhaps this document supported the fable of a Kumbric Witch spell that gave the Animals
the gifts of speech, memory, and remorse. Perhaps it merely refuted it, but glowingly. Any way you
looked at it there was the syncretism of myth, myth’s happy appetite to engorge on narrative strains.
Maybe this painting was the suggestion of some alarmed monk that the Animals received their
strengths through yet another sort of baptism, by nursing at the teat of the Kumbric Witch? Inducted
through the milk of the Witch?
Such analysis wasn’t his strong point. He had a hard enough time with the nutrients and common
pests of barley. He should do the unthinkable and deliver this actual scroll to Doctor Dillamond. It
would be valuable to know about.
Or maybe, he thought as he hurried to meet Elphaba, the thing safely smuggled into the deep
pocket of his cape and out of the Three Queens library, maybe the Witch wasn’t feeding the drenched
animal, but killing it? Sacrificing it to stay the floods?
Art was way beyond him.
He had run into Ama Clutch in the bazaar and begged her to deliver a note to Elphaba. The good
woman seemed more sympathetic than usual to him; was Galinda singing his praises in the privacy of
her room?
It was his first time to see the funny green jumping bean since amying back in Shin. And there
she was, on time, arriving at the cafe as requested, in a gray ghost of a dress, with a knitted over pull
fraying at the sleeves, and a man’s umbrella, big and black and lance like when rolled up. Elphaba
sat down with a graceless fromp, and examined the scroll. She looked at it more closely than she
would bring herself to look at Boq. But she listened to his exegesis, and thought it feeble. “What
prevents this from being the Fairy Queen Lurline?” she asked.
“Well, the accoutrements of glamour are missing. I mean the golden nimbus of hair. The
elegance. The transparent wings. The wand.”
“Those silver shoes are pretty gaudy.” She munched on a dry biscuit.
“It doesn’t look like a portrait of determination or-what do I mean-genesis. It looks reactive
rather than proactive. That figure is at the very least confused, don’t you think?”

“You’ve been hanging around Crope and Tibbett too long, go back to your barley,” she said,
pocketing the thing. “You’re getting vague and artsy. But I’ll give it to Doctor Dillamond. I’ll tell
you, he keeps making breakthroughs. This business of opposing lenses has opened up a whole new
world of corpuscular architecture. He let me look once, but I couldn’t make out much except for
stress and bias, color and pulse. He’s very excited. The problem I see now is getting him to stop-I
think he’s on the verge of founding a whole new branch of knowledge, and every day’s findings
provoke a hundred new questions. Clinical, theoretical, hypothetical, empirical, even ontological, I
guess. He’s been staying up late at night in the labs. We can see his lights on when we pull the
drapes at night.”
“Well, does he need anything more from us? I only have two days left in that library, and then
school starts.”
“I can’t get him to focus. I think he’s just putting together what he’s got.
“How about Galinda, then,” he said, “if we’re done with academic espionage for the time
being? How is she? Does she ask for me?”
Elphaba allowed herself to look at Boq. “No. Galinda really hasn’t
said anything about you. To give you hope you don’t deserve, I should add she’s hardly said
anything to me at all, either. She’s in a heavy sulk.”
“When will I see her again?”
“Does it mean that much to you?” She smiled wanly. “Boq, does she really mean that much to
you?”
“She is my world,” he answered.
“Your world is too small if she is it.”
“You can’t criticize the sine of a world. I can’t help it and I can’t stop it and I can’t deny it.”
“I should say you look silly,” she said, draining the last drops of lukewarm tea from her cup. “I
should say you’ll look back on this summer and cringe. She may be lovely, Boq-no, she is lovely, I
agree-but you’re worth a dozen of her.” At his shocked expression she threw up her hands. “Not to
me! I don’t mean me! Please, that stricken look! Spare me!”
But he wasn’t sure if he believed her. She gathered her things in a hurry and rushed out,
knocking the spittoon over in a clatter, slicing her big umbrella right through someone’s newspaper.
She didn’t look both ways as she lunged across Railway Square and was nearly mowed down by an
old Ox on a cumbersome tricycle.
The next time Boq saw Elphaba and Galinda, all thoughts of romance fled. It was in the small
triangular park outside the gate of Crage Hall. He had been just happening by, once again, this time
with Avaric in tow. The gates had opened and Ama Vimp had come flouncing out, face white and
nose dripping, and a flurry of girls poured out after her. Among them were Elphaba and Galinda and
Shenshen and Pfannee and Milla. Free of their walls, the girls huddled in chattering circles, or stood
beneath the trees in shock, or hugged each other, and wailed, and wiped each other’s eyes.
Boq and Avaric hurried up to their friends. Elphaba had her shoulders high, like a cat’s bony
yoke, and hers was the only dry face. She stayed arm’s length away from Galinda and the others. Boq
longed to take Galinda in his arms, but she didn’t look at him more than once before diving her face
into Milla’s thick-fur collar.
“What is it? What has happened?” said Avaric. “Miss Shenshen, Miss Pfannee?”
“It’s too horrible,” they cried, and Galinda nodded, and her nose ran messily along the shoulder
seam of Milla’s blouse. “The police are there, and a doctor, but it seems to be-“
“What,” said Boq, and turned to Elphaba. “Elphie what is it, what?”
“They found out,” she said. Her eyes were glazed like old Shizian porcelain. “Somehow the
bastards found out.”

The gate creaked open again, and petals of early autumn vine flowers, blue and purple, came
dancing over the college wall. They hung, and stepped like butterflies, and fell slowly, as three
caped policemen and a doctor in a dark cap emerged carrying a stretcher. A red blanket had covered
the patient, but the wind that tossed the petals caught a corner of the blanket and pulled it back in a
triangular fold. The girls all shrieked and Ama Vimp ran forward to tuck the blanket down, but in the
sunlight all had looked down and seen the twisted shoulders and back-thrown head of Doctor
Dillamond. His throat was still knotted with congealed ropes of black blood, where it had been slit
as thoroughly as if he had wandered into an abattoir.
Boq sat down, disgusted and alarmed, hoping he had not seen death, just a horrible treatable
wound. But the police and doctor weren’t hurrying, there was no reason to hurry now. Boq fell back
against the wall, and Avaric, who had never seen the Goat before, held Boq’s hands tightly with one
hand and covered his own face with the other.
Before long Galinda and Elphaba sank down beside him, and there was some weeping, some
long weeping, before words could be spoken. At last Galinda told the story.
“We went to bed last night-and Ama Clutch got up to pull the drapes closed. As she does. And
she looks down and says almost to herself, ‘Well there’s the lights on, Doctor Goat is at it again.’
Then she peers a little closer, down the yard, and says, ‘Well now isn’t that funny?’ And I don’t pay
any attention, I’m just sitting there staring, but Elphaba says, ‘What’s funny, Ama Clutch?’ And Ama
Clutch just pulls the drape very tightly and says in a funny voice, ‘Oh, nothing, my ducks. I’ll just
step down to check and make sure everything’s all right. As long as you girls are abed.’ She says
good night and she leaves, and I don’t know if she
goes down there or what, but we both fall asleep and in the morning she isn’t there with the tea.
She always gets the tea! She always does!”
Galinda gave herself to tears, sinking and then raising herself to her knees and trying to tear her
black silk gown with the white epaulets and the white bobbing. Elphaba, dry-eyed as a desert stone,
continued.
“We waited until after breakfast, but then we went to Madame Morrible’s,” said Elphaba, “and
told her that we didn’t know where Ama Clutch was. And Madame Morrible said that Ama Clutch
had had a relapse during the night and was recovering in the infirmary. She wouldn’t let us in to see
her at first, but then when Doctor Dillamond didn’t show up for our first lecture of the semester, we
wandered over there and just pushed our way in. Ama Clutch was in a hospital bed. Her face looked
funny, like the last pancake of the batch, the way it goes all wrong. We said, ‘Ama Clutch, Ama
Clutch, what has happened to you?’ She didn’t say anything even though her eyes were open. She
didn’t seem to hear us. We thought maybe she was asleep or in shock, but her breathing was regular
and her color was good even though her face seemed awry. Then as we were leaving she turned and
she looked at the bedside table.
“Next to a medicine bottle and a cup of lemon water there was a long rusty nail on a silver tray.
She reached a shaky hand out to the nail and picked it up and held it in her palm, tenderly, and she
talked to it. She said something like, ‘Oh well then, I know you didn’t mean to stab my foot last year.
You were only trying to get my attention. That’s what misbehavior is all about, just a little extra
loving being asked for. Well, don’t you worry Nail, because I’m going to love you just as much as
you need. And after I have a little nap you can tell me how you came to be holding up the platform of
the railway station at Frottica, for it seems quite a leap from your early years as a common hook for
a CLOSED FOR THE SEASON sign in that dingy hotel you were talking about.”
But Boq could not listen to this blather. He could not take in the story of a live Nail while a
dead Goat was being prayed over by hysterical faculty members. Boq could not listen to the sounds
of the prayers for the repose of the Animal’s spirit. He could not watch the departure of the corpse,

when they trundled it away. For it had been clear, with a glimpse of the Goat’s still face, that
whatever had given the doctor his enlivening character had already disappeared.
There was no doubt in the minds of anyone who had seen the corpse that the word, the correct
word, was murder. The way the pelt about the neck had bunched up, caked together like an
improperly cleaned worker’s paintbrush; the raw amber hollow in the eye. The official story was
that the doctor had broken a magnifying lens and stumbled against it, cutting an artery in the processbut nobody believed it.
The only one they could think of to ask, Ama Clutch, merely smiled when they came to visit,
with handfuls of pretty yellowing leaves or a plate of late Pertha grapes. She devoured the grapes
and chatted with the leaves. It was an ailment no one had ever seen before.
Glinda-for out of some belated apology for her initial rudeness to the martyred Goat, she now
called herself as he had once called her- Glinda seemed to be stricken dumb before the fact of Ama
Clutch. Glinda wouldn’t visit, nor discuss the poor woman’s condition, so Elphaba sneaked in once
or twice a day. Boq assumed that Ama Clutch suffered a passing malady. But after three weeks
Madame Morrible began to make sounds of concern that Elphaba and Glinda-still roomies-had no
chaperone. She suggested the common dormitory for them both. Glinda, who would no longer go to
see Madame Morrible on her own, nodded and accepted the demotion. It was Elphaba who came up
with a solution, mostly to salvage some shred of Glinda’s dignity.
Thus it was that ten days later Boq found himself in the beer garden of the Cock and Pumpkins,
waiting for the midweek coach from the Emerald City. Madame Morrible didn’t allow Elphaba and
Glinda to join him, so he had to decide for himself which two of the seven passengers alighting were
Nanny and Nessarose. The deformities of Elphaba’s sister
were well concealed, Elphaba had warned him; Nessarose could even descend from a carriage
with grace, providing the step was secure and the ground flat.
He met them, said hello. Nanny was a stewed plum of a woman, red and loose, her old skin
looking ready to trail off but for the tucks at the corners of the mouth, the fleshy rivets by the edges of
the eyes. More than a score of years in the badlands of Quadling Country had made her lethargic,
careless, and saturated with resentment. At her age she ought to have been allowed to nod off in
some warm chimney nook “Good to see a little Munchkinlander,” she murmured to Boq. “It’s like the
old times.” Then she turned and said into the shadows, “Come, my poppet.”
Had he not been warned, Boq wouldn’t have taken Nessarose as Elphaba’s sister. She was by
no means green, or even blue-white like a genteel person with bad circulation. Nessarose stepped
from the carriage elegantly, gingerly, strangely, sinking her heel to touch the iron step at the same
time as her toe. Walking as oddly as she did, she drew attention to her feet, which kept eyes away
from the torso, at least at first.
The feet landed on the ground, driven there with a ferocious intention to balance, and Nessarose
stood before him. She was as Elphaba had said: gorgeous, pink, slender as a wheat stalk, and
armless. The academic shawl over her shoulders was cunningly folded to soften the shock.
“Hello, good sir,” she said, nodding her head very slightly. “The valises are on top. Can you
manage?” Her voice was as smooth and oiled as Elphaba’s was serrated. Nanny propelled
Nessarose gently toward the hansom cab that Boq had engaged. He saw that Nessarose did not move
well without being able to lean backward against a steadying hand.
“So now Nanny has to see the girls through their schooling,” said Nanny to Boq as they rode
along. “What with their sainted mother in her waterlogged grave these long years, and their father off
his head. Well, the family always was bright, and brightness, as you know, decays brilliantly.
Madness is the most shining way. The elderly man, the Eminent Thropp, he’s still alive, and sensible
as an old ploughshare. Survived his daughter and his granddaughter. Elphaba is the Thropp Third

Descending. She’ll be the Eminence one day. As a Munchkinlander, you know about such things.”
“Nanny don’t gossip, it hurts my soul,” Nessarose said.
“Oh my pretty, don’t you fret. This Boq is an old friend, or as good as,” said Nanny. “Out in the
swamps of Quadling hell, my friend, we’ve lost the art of conversation. We croak in chorus with
what’s left of the froggie folk.”
“I intend to have a headache from shame,” said Nessarose, charmingly.
“But I knew Elphie when she was a small thing,” said Boq. “I’m from Rush Margins in Wend
Hardings. I must’ve met you too.”
“Primarily I preferred to reside at Coiwen Grounds,” said Nanny. “I was a mortal comfort to
the Lady Partra, the Thropp Second Descending. But occasionally I visited Rush Margins. So I may
have met you when you were young enough to run around without trousers.”
“How do you do,” said Nessarose.
“The name is Boq,” said Boq.
“This is Nessarose,” said Nanny, as if it were too painful for the girl to introduce herself. “She
was to come up to Shiz next year, but we have learned there’s a problem with some Gillikinese
minder going loopy. So Nanny is called to step in, and can Nanny leave her sweet? You see why
not.”
“A sad mystery, we hope for improvement,” said Boq.
At Crage Hall, Boq witnessed the reunion of the sisters, which was warm and gratifying.
Madame Morrible had her Grommetik thing wheel out tea and brisks for the Thropp females, and for
Nanny, Boq, and Glinda. Boq, who had begun to worry about Glinda’s retreat into silence, was
relieved to see Glinda cast a hard, appraising eye over the elegant dress of Nessarose. How could it
be, he wondered if Glinda was wondering, that two sisters should each be disfigured, and should
clothe themselves so unlike? Elphaba wore the humblest of dark frocks; today she was in a deep
purple, almost a black. Nessarose, balanced on a sofa next to Nanny, who assisted by lifting teacups
and crumpling buttery bits of crumpet, was in green silks, the colors of moss, emerald, and
yellowgreen roses. Green Elphaba, sitting on her other side and lending her support between the
shoulders as she tilted her head back to sip her tea, looked like a fashion accessory.
“The whole arrangement is highly unusual,” Madame Morrible was saying, “but we don’t have
unlimited room to accommodate peculiarities,
alas. We’ll leave Miss Elphaba and Miss Galinda-Glinda is it now, dear? How novel-we’ll
leave those two old pals as they are, and we’ll set you up, Miss Nessarose, with your Nanny in the
adjoining room that poor old Ama Clutch had. It’s small but you must think of it as cozy.”
“But when Ama Clutch recovers?” asked Glinda.
“Oh, but my dear,” said Madame Morrible, “such confidence the young have! Touching, really.”
She continued in a more steely voice. “You have already told me of the long-standing recurrence of
this unusual medical condition. I can only assume this has deteriorated into a permanent relapse.”
She munched a biscuit in her slow, fishy way, her cheeks going in and out like the leather flaps of a
bellows. “Of course we can all hope. Not much more than that, I’m afraid.”
“And we can pray,” Nessarose said.
“Oh well yes, that,” said the Head. “That goes without saying among people of good breeding,
Miss Nessarose.”
Boq watched Nessarose and Elphaba both blush. Glinda excused herself and went away. The
usual pang of panic Boq felt at her departure was softened by knowing he would see her again in life
sciences next week, for, with the new prohibitions on Animal hiring, the colleges had decided to
give assembly lectures to all the students from all the colleges, at once. Boq would see Glinda at the
first coeducation lecture ever held at Shiz. He couldn’t wait.

Though she had changed. She had surely changed.
Glinda was changed. She knew it herself. She had come to Shiz a vain, silly thing, and she now
found herself in a coven of vipers. Maybe it was her own fault. She had invented a nonsense disease
for Ama Clutch, and Ama Clutch had come down with it. Was this proof of an inherent talent of
sorcery? Glinda opted to specialize in sorcery this year, and accepted it as her punishment that
Madame Morrible didn’t change her roomie as promised. Glinda no longer cared. Beside Doctor
Dillamond’s death, a lot of other matters now seemed insignificant.
But she didn’t trust Madame Morrible either. Glinda had told nobody else that stupid and
extravagant lie. So now she would no longer
allow Madame Morrible so much as a finger hold into her life. And Glinda still didn’t have the
nerve to confess her unintentional crime to anyone. While she fretted, Boq, that pesky little flea, kept
zizzing around her looking for attention. She was sorry she had let him kiss her. What a mistake!
Well, all that was behind her now, that trembling on the edges of social disaster. She had seen the
Misses Pfannee et cetera for what they were-shallow, self-serving snobs-and she would have no
more to do with them.
So Elphaba, no longer a social liability, had all the potential of becoming an actual friend. If
being saddled with this broken doll of a baby sister didn’t interfere too much. It was only with
prodding that Glinda had gotten Elphaba to talk at all about her sister, so that Glinda might be
prepared for Nessarose’s arrival and the enlargement of their social circle.
“She was born at Colwen Grounds, when I was about three,” Elphaba had told her. “My family
had gone back to Colwen Grounds for a short stay. It was one of those times of intense drought. Our
father told us later, after our mother had died, that Nessarose’s birth had coincided with a temporary
resurgence of well water in the vicinity. They’d been doing pagan dances and there was a human
sacrifice.”
Glinda had stared at Elphaba, who sounded at once unwilling and offended.
“A friend of theirs, a Quadling glassblower. The crowd, incited by some rabble-rousing
pfaithers and a prophetic clock, fell on him and killed him. A man named Turtle Heart.” Elphaba had
pressed the palms of her hands over the high uppers of her stiff black secondhand shoes, and kept her
eyes trained on the floor. “I think that was why my parents became missionaries to the Quadling
people, why they never went back to Colwen Grounds or Munchkinland.”
“But your mother died in childbirth?” said Glinda. “How could she have been a missionary?”
“She didn’t die for five years,” said Elphaba, looking at the folds of her dress, as if the story
were an embarrassment. “She died when our younger brother was born. My father named him Shell,
after Turtle Heart, I think. So Shell and Nessarose and I lived the lives of gypsy children, slopping
around from Quadling settlement to settlement with Nanny and our father, Frex. He preached, and
Nanny taught us and
raised us up and kept house such as we ever had, which wasn’t much. Meanwhile the Wizard’s
men began draining the badlands to get at the ruby deposits. It never worked, of course. They
managed to chase the Quadlings out and kill them, round them up in settlement camps for their own
protection and starve them. They despoiled the badlands, raked up the rubies, and left. My father
went barmy over it. There never were enough rubies to make it worth the effort; we still have no
canal system to run that legendary water from the Vinkus all the way cross-country to Munchkinland.
And the drought, after a few promising reprieves, continues unabated. The Animals are recalled to
the lands of their ancestors, a ploy to give the farmers a sense of control over something anyway. It’s
a systematic marginalizing of populations, Glinda, that’s what the Wizard’s all about.”
“We were talking about your childhood,” said Glinda.
“Well that’s it, that’s all part of it. You can’t divorce your particulars from politics,” Elphaba

said. “You want to know what we ate? How we played?”
“I want to know what Nessarose is like, and Shell,” said Glinda.
“Nessarose is a strong-willed semi-invalid,” said Elphaba. “She’s very smart, and thinks she is
holy. She has inherited my father’s taste for religion. She isn’t good at taking care of other people
because she has never learned how to take care of herself. She can’t. My father required me to babysit her through most of my childhood. What she will do when Nanny dies I don’t know. I suppose I’ll
have to take care of her again.”
“Oh, what a hideous prospect for a life,” said Glinda, before she could stop herself.
But Elphaba only nodded grimly. “I can’t agree with you more,” she said.
“As for Shell-” continued Glinda, wondering what fresh pain she might tread upon.
“Male, and white, and whole,” she said. “He’s now about ten, I guess. He’ll stay at home and
take care of our father. He is a boy, just as boys are. A little dull, maybe, but he hasn’t had the
advantages we’ve had.”
“Which are?” prompted Glinda.
“Even for a short time,” said Elphaba, “we had a mother. Giddy, alcoholic, imaginative,
uncertain, desperate, brave, stubborn, supportive
woman. We had her. Melena. Shell had no mother but Nanny, who did her best.”
“And who was your mother’s favorite?” said Glinda.
“Can’t tell that,” said Elphaba casually, “don’t know. Would have been Shell, probably, since
he’s a boy. But she died without seeing him so she didn’t even get that small consolation.”
“Your father’s favorite?”
“Oh, that’s easy,” said Elphaba, jumping up and finding her books on her shelf, and getting
ready to run out and stop the conversation in its tracks. “That’s Nessarose. You’ll see why when you
meet her. She’d be anyone’s favorite.” She skidded out of the room with no more than a brief flurry
of green fingers, a good-bye.
Glinda wasn’t so sure she favored Elphaba’s sister. Nessarose seemed so demanding. Nanny
was overly attentive, and Elphaba kept suggesting adjustments in their living arrangements to make
things perfect. Hitch the drapes to this angle instead of that, to keep the touch of the sun off
Nessarose’s pretty skin. Can we have the oil lamp turned up high so Nessarose can read? Shhh, no
chatting after hours; Nessarose has retired and she is such a light sleeper.
Glinda was a bit awed by Nessarose’s freaky beauty. Nessarose dressed well (if not
extravagantly). She deflected attention from herself, though, by a system of little social tics-the head
lowered in a sudden onslaught of devotion, the eyes batting. It was especially moving-and irritatingto have to wipe away a trickle of tears brought on by some epiphany in Nessarose’s rich inner
spiritual life of which bystanders could have no inkling. What did one say?
Glinda began to retreat into her studies. Sorcery was being taught by a louche new instructor
named Miss Greyling. She had a gushing respect for the subject but, it soon became apparent, little
natural ability. “At its most elemental a spell is no more than a recipe for change,” she would flute at
them. But when the chicken she tried to turn into a piece of toast became instead a mess of used
coffee grounds cupped in a lettuce leaf, the students all made a mental note never to accept an
invitation to dine with her.
In the back of the room, creeping with pretend invisibility so that she might observe, Madame
Morrible shook her head and clucked. Once
or twice she could not stop herself from interfering. “No dab hand in the sorcerer’s parlor I,”
she would protest, “yet surely Miss Greyling you’ve omitted the steps to bind and convince? I’m
merely asking. Let me try. You know I take a special pleasure in our training of sorceresses.”
Inevitably Miss Greyling sat on what was left of a previous demonstration, or dropped her purse,

collapsing into a heap of shame and mortification. The girls giggled, and didn’t feel that they were
learning much.
Or were they? The benefit of Miss Greyling’s clumsiness was that they were not afraid to try
for themselves. And she didn’t stint at enthusiasm if a student managed to accomplish the day’s task.
The first time Glinda was able to mask a spool of thread with a spell of invisibility, even for a few
seconds, Miss Greyling clapped her hands and jumped up and down and broke a heel off her shoe. It
was gratifying, and encouraging.
“Not that I have any objection,” said Elphaba one day, when she and Glinda and Nessarose
(and, inevitably, Nanny) sat under a pearlfruit tree by the Suicide Canal. “But I have to wonder. How
does the university get away with teaching sorcery when its original charter was so strictly
unionist?”
“Well, there isn’t anything inherently either religious or nonreligious about sorcery,” said
Glinda. “Is there? There isn’t anything inherently pleasure faithist about it either.”
“Spells, changings, apparitions? It’s all entertainment,” said Elphaba. “It’s theatre.”
“Well, it can look like theatre, and in the hands of Miss Greyling it often looks like bad
theatre,” admitted Glinda. “But the gist of it isn’t concerned with application. It’s a practical skill,
like-like reading and writing. It’s not that you can, it’s what you read or write. Or, if you’ll excuse
the play on words, what you spell.”
“Father disapproved mightily,” Nessarose said, in the dulcet tones of the unflappably faithful.
“Father always said that magic was the sleight of hand of the devil. He said pleasure faith was no
more than an exercise to distract the masses from the true object of their devotion.”
“That’s a unionist talking,” said Glinda, not taking offense. “A sensible opinion, if what you’re
up against is charlatans or street performers. But sorcery doesn’t have to be that. What about the
common witches up in the Glildcus? They say that they magick the cows they’ve imported from
Munchkinland so they don’t go mooing over the edge of some
precipice. Who could ever afford to put a fence on every ledge there? The magic is a local
skill, a contribution to community well-being. It doesn’t have to supplant religion.”
“It may not have to,” said Nessarose, “but if it tends to, then have we a duty to be wary of it?”
“Oh, wary, well, I’m wary of the water I drink, it might be poisoned,” said Glinda. “That
doesn’t mean I stop drinking water.”
“Well, I don’t even think it’s so big an issue,” said Elphaba. “I think sorcery is trivial. It’s
concerned with itself mostly, it doesn’t lead outward.”
Glinda concentrated very hard and tried to make Elphaba’s leftover sandwich elevate outward
over the canal. She only succeeded in exploding the thing in a small combustion of mayonnaise and
shredded carrot and chopped olives. Nessarose lost her balance laughing, and Nanny had to prop her
up again. Elphaba was covered in bits of food, which she picked off herself and ate, to the disgust
and laughter of everyone else. “It’s all effects, Glinda,” she said. “There’s nothing ontologically
interesting about magic. Not that I believe in unionism either,” she protested. “I’m an atheist and an
aspiritualist.”
“You say that to shock and scandalize,” said Nessarose primly. “Glinda, don’t listen to a word
of her. She always does this, usually to make Father irate.”
“Father’s not around,” Elphaba reminded her sister.
“I stand in for him and I am offended,” said Nessarose. “It’s all very well to turn your nose up
at unionism when you have been given a nose by the Unnamed God. It’s quite funny, isn’t it, Glinda?
Childish.” She looked spitting angry.
“Father’s not around,” said Elphaba again, in a tone that verged on the apologetic. “You needn’t
rush to public defense of his obsessions.”

“What you term his obsessions are my articles of faith,” she said with a chilly clarity.
“Well you’re not a bad sorceress, for a beginner,” said Elphaba, turning to Glinda. “That was a
pretty good mess you made of my lunch.”
“Thank you,” Glinda said. “I didn’t mean to pelt you with it. But I am getting better, aren’t I?
And out in public.”
“A shocking display,” Nessarose said. “That’s exactly what Father would have deplored about
sorcery. The allure is all in the surface.”
“I agree, it still tastes like olives,” Elphaba said, finding a clump of black olive in her sleeve
and holding it out on the tip of her finger to her sister’s mouth. “Taste, Nessa?”
But Nessarose turned her face away and lost herself in silent prayer.
A few days later Boq managed to catch Elphaba’s eye at the break of their life sciences class,
and they met up in an alcove off the main corridor. “What do you think of this new Doctor Nikidik?”
he asked.
“I find it hard to listen,” she said, “but that’s because I still want to hear Doctor Dillamond and
I can’t believe he’s gone.” On her face was a look of gray submission to impossible reality.
“Well that’s one of the things I’m curious about,” he said. “You told me all about Doctor
Dillamond’s breakthrough. Do you know if his lab has been cleared out yet? Maybe there’s
something there worth finding. You took the notes for him, couldn’t they be the basis of some
proposal, or at least some further study?”
She looked at him with a wiry, strong expression. “Do you think I’m not way ahead of you?”
she asked. “Of course I went tramping through there the day his body was found. Before anyone
could lace up the door with padlocks and binding spells. Boq, do you take me for a fool?”
“No, I don’t take you for a fool, so tell me what you found,” he said.
“His findings are well hidden away,” she said, “and though there are colossal holes in my
training, I am studying it on my own.”
“You mean you’re not going to show me?” He was shocked.
“It was never your particular interest,” she said. “Besides, until there’s something to prove,
what’s the point? I don’t think Doctor Dillamond was there yet.”
“I am a Munchkinlander,” he answered proudly. “Look, Elphie, you’ve more or less convinced
me what the Wizard is up to. The confining of Animals back onto farms-to give the dissatisfied
Munchkinlander farmers the impression he’s doing something for them-and also to provide forced
labor for the sinking of useless new wells. It’s vile. But this affects Wend Hardings and the towns
that sent me here. I have a right to
know what you know. Maybe we can figure it out together, work to make a change.”
“You have too much to lose,” she said. “I’m going to take this on myself.”
“Take what on?”
She only shook her head. “The less you know the better, and I mean for your sake. Whoever
killed Doctor Dillamond doesn’t want his findings made public. What kind of a friend would I be to
you if I put you at risk too?”
“What kind of friend would I be to you if I didn’t insist?” he retorted.
But she wouldn’t tell him. When he sat next to her during the rest of the class and passed her
little notes, she ignored them all. Later he thought that they might have developed a genuine impasse
in their friendship had the odd attack on the newcomer not occurred during that very session.
Doctor Nikidik had been lecturing on the Life Force. Entwining around each wrist the two
separate tendrils of his long straggly beard, he spoke in falling tones so that only the first half of each
sentence made it to the back of the room. Hardly a single student was following. When Doctor
Nikidik took a small bottle from his vest pocket and mumbled something about “Extract of

Biological Intention,” only the students in the front row sat up and opened their eyes. For Boq and
Elphaba, and everyone else, the patter ran-“A little sauce for the soup mumble mumble, as if creation
were an unconcluded mumble mumble mumble, notwithstanding the obligations of all sentient
mumble mumble mumble, and so as a little exercise to make those nodding off in the back of the
mumble mumble mumble, behold a little mundane miracle, courtesy of mumble mumble mumble.”
A frisson of excitement had woken everyone up. The Doctor uncorked the smoky bottle and
made a jerky movement. They could all see a small puff of dust, like an effervescence of talcum
powder, jostle itself in a swimming plume in the air above the neck of the bottle. The Doctor rowed
his hands a couple of times, to start the air currents eddying upward. Keeping some rare sort of
spatial coherence, the plume began to migrate upward and over. The ooohs that the students were
inclined to
make were all postponed. Doctor Nikidik held a finger out to them to shush them, and they
could tell why. A vast intake of breath would change the pattern of air currents and divert the floating
musk of powder. But the students began to smile, despite themselves. Above the stage, amid the
standard ceremonial stags’ horns and brass trumpets on braid, hung four oil portraits of the founding
fathers of Ozma Towers. In their ancient garb and serious expressions they looked down on today’s
students. If this “biological intention” were to be applied to one of the founding fathers, what would
he say, seeing men and women students together in the great hail? What would he have to say about
anything? It was a grand moment of anticipation.
But when a door to the side of the stage opened, the mechanics of the air currents were
disturbed. A student looked in, puzzled. A new student, oddly dressed in suede leggings and a white
cotton shirt, with a pattern of blue diamonds tattooed on the dark skin of his face and hands. No one
had seen him before, or anyone like him. Boq clutched Elphaba’s hand tightly and whispered, “Look!
A Winkle!”
And so it seemed, a student from the Vinkus, in strange ceremonial garb, coming late for class,
opening the wrong door, confused and apologetic, but the door had shut behind him and locked from
this side, and there were no nearby seats available in the front rows. So he dropped where he was
and sat with his back against the door, hoping, no doubt, to look inconspicuous.
“Drat and damn, the thing’s been shabbed off course,” said Doctor Nikidik. “You fool, why
don’t you come to class on time?”
The shining mist, about the size of a bouquet of flowers, had veered upward in a draft, and it
bypassed the ranks of long-dead dignitaries waiting an unexpected chance to speak again. Instead it
cloaked one of the racks of antlers, seeming for a few moments to hang itself on the twisting prongs.
“Well, I can scarcely hope to hear a word of wisdom from them, and I refuse to waste any more of
this precious commodity on classroom demonstrations,” said Doctor Nikidik. “The research is still
incomplete and I had thought that mumble mumble mumble. Let you discover for yourselves if
mumble mumble mumble. I should hardly wish to prejudice your mumble.”
The antlers suddenly took a convulsive twist on the wall, and wrenched themselves out of the
oaken paneling. They tumbled and shattered to the floor, to the shrieking and laughing of the students,
especially because for a minute Doctor Nikidik didn’t know what the uproar was about. He turned
around in time to see the antlers right themselves and wait, quivering, twitching, on the dais, like a
fighting cock all nastied up and ready to go into the ring.
“Oh well, don’t look at me,” said Doctor Nikidik, collecting his books, “I didn’t ask for
anything from you. Blame that one if you must.” And he casually pointed at the Vinkus student, who
was cowering so wide-eyed that the more cynical of the older students began to suspect this was all
a setup.
The antlers stood on their points and skittered, crablike, across the stage. As the students rose in

a common scream, the antlers scrabbled up the body of the Vinkus boy and pinned him against the
locked door. One wing of the rack caught him by the neck, shackling him in its V yoke, and the other
reared back in the air to stab him in the face.
Doctor Nikidik tried to move fast, and fell to his arthritic knees, but before he could right
himself two boys were up on the stage, out of the front row, grabbing the antlers and wrestling them
to the ground. The Vinkus boy shrieked in a foreign tongue. “That’s Crope and Tibbett!” said Boq,
jouncing Elphaba in the shoulder, “look!” The sorcery students were all jumping on their seats and
trying to lob spells at the murderous antlers, and Crope and Tibbett found their grips and lost them
and found them again, until at last they succeeded in breaking off one driving tine, then another, and
the pieces, still twitching, fell to the stage floor without further momentum.
“Oh the poor guy,” said Boq, for the Vinkus student had slumped down and was volubly
weeping behind his blue-diamonded hands. “I never saw a student from the Vinkus before. What an
awful welcome to Shiz.”
The attack on the Vinkus student provoked gossip and speculation. In sorcery the next day
Glinda asked Miss Greyling to explain something. “How could Doctor Nikidik’s Extract of
Biological Intention or whatever it was, how could it fall under the heading of life sciences when it
behaved like a master spell? What really is the difference between science and sorcery?”
“Ah,” said Miss Greyling, choosing this moment to apply herself to the care of her hair.
“Science, my dears, is the systematic dissection of
nature, to reduce it to working parts that more or less obey universal laws. Sorcery moves in
the opposite direction. It doesn’t rend, it repairs. It is synthesis rather than analysis. It builds anew
rather than revealing the old. In the hands of someone truly skilled”-at this she jabbed herself with a
hair pin and yelped-“it is Art. One might in fact call it the Superior, or the Finest, Art. It bypasses the
Fine Arts of painting and drama and recitation. It doesn’t pose or represent the world. It becomes. A
very noble calling.” She began to weep softly with the force of her own rhetoric. “Can there be a
higher desire than to change the world? Not to draw Utopian blueprints, but really to order change?
To revise the misshapen, reshape the mistaken, to justify the margins of this ragged error of a
universe? Through sorcery to survive?”
At teatime, still awed and amused, Glinda reported Miss Greyling’s little heartfelt speech to the
two Thropp sisters. Nessarose said, “Only the Unnamed God creates, Glinda. If Miss Greyling
confuses sorcery with creation she is in grave danger of corrupting your morals.”
“Well,” said Glinda, thinking of Ama Clutch on the bed of mental pain Glinda had once
imagined for her, “my morals aren’t in the greatest shape to start out with, Nessa.”
“Then if sorcery is to be helpful at all, it must be in reconstructing your character,” said
Nessarose firmly. “If you apply yourself in that direction, I suspect it will be all right in the end. Use
your talent at sorcery, don’t be used by it.”
Glinda suspected that Nessarose might develop a knack for being witheringly superior. She
winced in advance, even while taking Nessarose’s suggestion to heart.
But Elphaba said, “Glinda, that was a good question. I wish Miss Greyling had answered it.
That little nightmare with the antlers looked more like magic than science to me, too. The poor
Vinkus fellow! Suppose we ask Doctor Nikidik next week?”
“Who ever would have the courage to do that?” cried Glinda. “Miss Greyling is at least
ridiculous. Doctor Nikidik, with that lovable bumbling mumbling incoherent way he has-he’s so
distinguished.”
At the life sciences lecture the following week, all eyes were on the new Vinkus boy. He
arrived early and settled himself in the balcony, about as
far from the lectern as he could get. Boq had the suspicion of nomads all settled farmers

possessed. But Boq had to admit that the expression in the new boy’s eyes was intelligent. Avaric,
sliding into the seat next to Boq, said, “He’s a prince, they say. A prince without a purse or a throne.
A pauper noble. In his particular tribe, I mean. He stays at Ozma Towers and his name is Fiyero.
He’s a real Winkle, full-blood. Wonder what he makes of civilization?”
“If that was civilization, last week, he must long for his own barbaric kind,” said Elphaba from
the seat on the other side of Boq.
“What’s he wearing such silly paint for?” said Avaric. “He only draws attention to himself.
And that skin. I wouldn’t want to have skin the color of shit.”
“What a thing to say,” said Elphaba. “If you ask me, that’s a shitty opinion.”
“Oh please,” said Boq. “Let’s just shut up.”
“I forgot, Elphie, skin is your issue too,” said Avaric.
“Leave me out of this,” she said. “We just had lunch, and you give me dyspepsia, Avaric. You
and the beans we had at lunch.”
“I’m changing my seat,” warned Boq, but Doctor Nikidik came in just then, and the class rose to
its feet in routine respect, then settled back noisily, chummily, chattering.
For a few minutes Elphaba waved her hand to get the Doctor’s attention, but she was sitting too
far back and he was burbling on about something else. She finally leaned over to Boq and said, “At
the recess I’ll change my seat and go forward so he can see me.” Then the class watched as Doctor
Nikidik finished his inaudible preamble and beckoned a student to open the same door at the side of
the stage that Fiyero had stumbled through the previous week.
In came a boy from Three Queens rolling a table like a tea tray. On it, crouched as if to make
itself as small as possible, was a lion cub. Even from the balcony they could sense the terror of the
beast. Its tail, a little whip the color of mashed peanuts, lashed back and forth, and its shoulders
hunched. It had no mane to speak of yet, it was too tiny. But the tawny head twisted this way and that,
as if counting the threats. It opened its mouth in a little terrified yawp, the infant form of an adult
roar. All over the room hearts melted and people said “Awwwwww.”
“Hardly more than a kitten,” said Doctor Nikidik. “I had thought to call it Prrr, but it shivers
more often than it purrs, so I call it Brrr instead.”
The creature looked at Doctor Nikidik, and removed itself to the far edge of the trolley.
“Now the question of the morning is this,” said Doctor Nikidik. “Picking up from the somewhat
skewed interests of Doctor Dillamond, who mumble mumble. Who can tell me if this is an Animal or
an animal?”
Elphaba didn’t wait to be called on. She stood up in the balcony and launched her answer out in
a clear, strong voice. “Doctor Nikidik, the question you asked was who can tell if this is an Animal
or an animal. It seems to me the answer is that its mother can. Where is its mother?”
A buzz of amusement. “Caught in the swamp of syntactical semantics, I see,” said the Doctor
merrily. He spoke louder, as if having only now realized that there was a balcony in the hall. “Well
done, Miss. Let me rephrase the question. Will someone here venture a hypothesis as to the nature of
this specimen? And give a reason for such an assessment? We see before us a beast at a tender age,
long before any such beast could command language if language were part of its makeup. Before
language-assuming language-is this still an Animal?”
“I repeat my question, Doctor,” sang out Elphaba. “This is a very young cub. Where is its
mother? Why is it taken from its mother at such an early age? How even can it feed?”
“Those are impertinent questions to the academic issue at hand,” said the Doctor. “Still, the
youthful heart bleeds easily. The mother, shall we say, died in a sadly timed explosion. Let us
presume for the sake of argument that there was no way of telling whether the mother was a Lioness
or a lioness. After all, as you may have heard, some Animals are going back to the wild to escape the

implications of the current laws.”
Elphaba sat down, nonplused. “It doesn’t seem right to me,” she said to Boq and Avaric. “For
the sake of a science lesson to drag a cub in here without its mother. Look how terrified it is. It is
shivering. And it can’t be cold.”
Other students began to venture opinions, but the Doctor shot them down one by one. The point
being, apparently, that without language or contextual clues, at its infant stages a beast was not
clearly Animal or animal.
“This has a political implication,” said Elphaba loudly. “I thought this was life sciences, not
current events.”
Boq and Avaric shushed her. She was getting a terrible reputation as a loudmouth.
The Doctor dragged the episode out long after everyone had digested the point. But finally he
turned and said, “Now do you think that if we could cauterize that part of the brain that develops
language, we could eliminate the notion of pain and thus its existence? Early tests on this little torn
lion show interesting results.” He had picked up a small hammer with a rubber head, and a syringe.
The beast drew itself up and hissed, and then backed up and fell on the floor, and streaked toward
the door, which had closed and locked from this side as it had the previous week.
But it wasn’t only Elphaba who was on her feet yelling. Half a dozen students were shouting at
the Doctor. “Pain? Eliminate pain? Look at the thing, it’s terrified! It already gets pain! Don’t do that,
what are you, crazy?”
The Doctor paused, visibly tightening his grip on the mallet. “I will not preside over such
shocking refusal to learn!” he said, affronted. “You are leaping to harebrained conclusions based on
sentiment and no observation. Bring the beast here. Bring it back. Young lady, I insist. I shall be
quite cross.”
But two girls from Briscoe Hall disobeyed and ran out of the room carrying the clawing lion
club in an apron between them. The room collapsed in an uproar and Doctor Nikidik stalked off the
stage. Elphaba turned to Boq and said, “Well, I guess I don’t get to ask Glinda’s good question about
the difference between science and sorcery, do I? We were definitely headed down a different path
today.” But her voice was shaking.
“You felt for that beast, didn’t you?” Boq was touched. “Elphie, you’re trembling. I don’t mean
this in an insulting way, but you’ve nearly gone white with passion. Come on, let’s sneak out and get
a tea at the cafe at Railway Square, for old times’ sake.”
Perhaps every accidental cluster of people has a short period of grace, in between the initial
shyness and prejudice on the one hand and eventual repugnance and betrayal on the other. For Boq it
seemed that his summer obsession with the-then-Galinda made sense if only to usher in this
following, more mature comfort with a circle of friends who had
begun to feel inevitably and permanently connected.
The boys still weren’t allowed access to Crage Hall, nor the girls to the boys’ schools, but the
city centre area of Shiz became an extension of the parlors and lecture halls in which they were
allowed to mingle. On a midweek afternoon, on a weekend morning, they would meet by the canal
with a bottle of wine, or in a cafe or student watering hole, or they would walk about and discuss the
fine points of Shiz architecture, or they would laugh about the excesses of their teachers. Boq and
Avaric, Elphaba and Nessarose (with Nanny), Glinda, and sometimes Pfannee and Shenshen and
Milla, and sometimes Crope and Tibbett. And Crope brought Fiyero along and introduced him,
which frosted Tibbett for a week or so until the evening that Fiyero said, in his shy formal way, “Of
course-I have been married for some time. We marry young in the Vinkus.” The others were agog at
the notion, and felt juvenile.
To be sure, Elphaba and Avaric needled each other mercilessly. Nessarose tried everyone’s

patience with her religious rantings. Crope’s and Tibbett’s stream of saucy remarks got them dumped
in the canal more than once. But Boq was relieved to find that his crush on Glinda was lifting
somewhat. She sat on the edge of the picnic blanket with a look of self-reliance, and she diverted
conversation away from herself. He had loved the girl who had loved the glamour in herself, and that
girl seemed to have disappeared. But he was happy to have Glinda as a friend. Well, in a nutshell:
he had loved Galinda and this now was Glinda. Someone he could no longer quite figure out. Case
closed.
It was a charmed circle.
All the girls steered clear of Madame Morrible while they could. One cold evening, however,
Grommetik came hunting for the Thropp sisters. Nanny huffed and wound the strings of a fresh apron
around her waist, and prodded Nessarose and Elphaba downstairs toward the parlor of the Head.
“I hate that Grommetik thing,” said Nessarose. “However does it work, anyway? Is it
clockwork or is it magicked, or some combination of the two?”
“I always imagined a bit of nonsense-that there was a dwarf inside, or an acrobatic family of
elves each working a limb,” said Elphaba.
“Whenever Grommetik comes around, my hand gets a strange hunger for a hammer.”
“I can’t imagine,” Nessarose said. “Hand hunger, I mean.”
“Hush, you two, the thing has ears,” Nanny said.
Madame Morrible was glancing through the financial papers, making a few marks in the margin
before she deigned to acknowledge her students. “This won’t take but a moment,” she said. “I’ve had
a letter from your dear father, and a package for you. I thought it kindest to deliver the news myself.”
“News?” said Nessarose, blanching.
“He could have written to us as well as to you,” said Elphaba.
Madame Morrible ignored her. “He writes to ask of Nessarose’s health and progress, and to
tell you both that he is going to undertake a fast and penance for the return of Ozma Tippetarius.”
“Oh, the blessed little girL” said Nanny, warming to one of her favorite subjects. “When the
Wizard took over the Palace all those years ago and he had the Ozma Regent jailed, we all thought
that the sainted Ozma child would call down disaster upon the Wizard’s head. But they say she’s
been spirited away and frozen in a cave, like Lurlina. Has Frexspar got the mettle to melt her-is now
her time to return?”
“Please,” said Madame Morrible to the sisters, with a sour glance at Nanny, “I haven’t asked
you here so that your Nanny could discuss this contemporary apocrypha, nor to slander our glorious
Wizard. It was a peaceful transition of power. That the Ozma Regent’s health failed while under
house arrest was a mere coincidence, nothing more. As to the power of your father to raise the
missing royal child from some unsubstantiated state of somnolence-well, you’ve as much as admitted
to me that your father is erratic, if not mad. I can only wish him health in his endeavors. But I feel it
my duty to point out to you girls that we do not smile on seditious attitudes at Crage Hall. I hope you
have not imported your father’s royalist yearnings into the dormitories here.”
“We assign ourselves to the Unnamed God, not to the Wizard nor to any possible remnant of the
Royal Family,” Nessarose said proudly.
“I have no feeling on the matter at all,” muttered Elphaba, “except that Father loves lost
causes.”
“Very well,” said the Head. “As it should be. Now I have had a package for you.” She handed
it to Elphaba, but added, “It is for Nessarose, I think.”
“Open it, Elphie, please,” said Nessarose. Nanny leaned forward to look.
Elphaba undid the cord and opened the wooden box. From a pile of ash shavings she withdrew
a shoe, and then another. Were they silver?-or blue?-or now red?-lacquered with a candy shell

brilliance of polish? It was hard to tell and it didn’t matter; the effect was dazzling. Even Madame
Morrible gasped at their splendor. The surface of the shoes seemed to pulse with hundreds of
reflections and refractions. In the firelight, it was like looking at boiling corpuscles of blood under a
magnifying glass.
“He writes that he bought them for you from some toothless tinker woman outside Ovvels,” said
Madame Morrible, “and that he dressed them up with silver glass beads that he made himself-that
someone had taught him to make?-“
“Turtle Heart,” said Nanny darkly.
“-and”- Madame Morrible flipped the letter over, squinting-“he says he had hoped to give you
something special before you left for university, but in the sudden circumstances of Ama Clutch’s
sickness . . . blah blah .. . he was unprepared. So now he sends them to his Nessarose to keep her
beautiful feet warm and dry and beautiful, and he sends them with his love.”
Elphaba drove her fingers through the curlicues of shavings. There was nothing else in the box,
nothing for her.
“Aren’t they gorgeous!” Nessarose exclaimed. “Elphie, fix them on my feet, would you please?
Oh, how they sparkle!”
Elphaba went on her knees before her sister. Nessarose sat as regal as any Ozma, spine erect
and face glowing. Elphaba lifted her sister’s feet and slipped off the common house slippers, and
replaced them with the dazzling shoes.
“How thoughtful he is!” said Nessarose.
“Good thing you can stand on your own two feet, you,” muttered Nanny to Elphaba, and put her
old hand patronizingly on Elphaba’s shoulder blades, but Elphaba shrugged it away.
“They’re just gorgeous,” said Elphaba thickly. “Nessarose, they’re made for you. They fit like a
dream.”
“Oh, Elphie, don’t be cross,” Nessarose said, looking down at her feet. “Don’t ruin my small
happiness with resentment, will you? He knows you don’t need this kind of thing. .
“Of course not,” said Elphaba. “Of course I don’t.”
That evening the friends risked breaking curfew by ordering another bottle of wine. Nanny
tutted and fretted, but as she kept downing her portion as neatly as anyone else, she was overruled.
Fiyero told the story of how he had been married at the age of seven to a girl from a neighboring
tribe. They all gawped at his apparent lack of shame. He had only seen his bride once, by accident,
when they were both about nine. “I won’t really take up with her until we are twenty, and I’m now
only eighteen,” he added. With the relief of imagining he might still be as virginal as the rest of them,
they ordered yet another bottle of wine.
The candles guttered, a small autumnal rain fell. Though the room was dry, Elphaba drew her
cloak about her as if anticipating the walk home. She had gotten over the sting of being overlooked
by Frex. She and Nessarose began to tell funny stories about their father, as if to prove to themselves
and to everyone else that nothing was amiss. Nessarose, who wasn’t much of a drinker, allowed
herself to laugh. “Despite my appearance, or maybe because of it, he always called me his beautiful
pet,” she said, alluding to her lack of arms for the first time in public. “He would say, ‘Come here,
my pet, and let me give you a piece of apple.’ And I would walk over as best I could, tilting and
tottering if Nanny or Elphie or Mother wasn’t around to support me, and fall into his lap, and lean up
smiling, and he’d drop small pieces of fruit into my mouth.”
“What did he call you, Liphie?” asked Glinda.
“He called her Fabala,” interrupted Nessarose.
“At home, at home only,” Elphaba said.
“True, you are your father’s little Fabala,” crooned Nanny, almost to herself, just outside the

circle of smiling faces. “Little Fabala, little Elphaba, little Elphie.”
“He never called me pet,” said Elphaba, raising her glass to her sis
ter. “But we all know he told the truth, as Nessarose is the pet in the family. Hence those
splendid shoes.”
Nessarose blushed and accepted a toast. “Ah, but while I had his attention because of my
condition, you captured his heart when you sang,” she said.
“Captured his heart? Hah. You mean I performed a necessary function.”
But the others said to Elphaba, “Oh, do you sing? Well then! Sing, sing, you must! Another
bottle, another glass, push back the chair, and before we leave for the night, you must sing! Go on!”
“Only if the others will,” said Elphaba, bossily. “Boq? Some Munchkinlander spinniel? Avaric,
a Gilhikinese ballad? Glinda? Nanny, a lullaby?”
“We know a dirty round, we’ll go next if you go,” said Crope and Tibbett.
“And I will sing a Vinkus hunting chant,” said Fiyero. Everyone chortled with pleasure and
clapped him on the back. So then Elphaba had to stand, push her chair aside, clear her throat and
sound a note into her cupped hands, and start. As if she were singing for her father, again, after all
this time.
The bar mother slapped her rag at some noisy older men to shush them, and the dart players
dropped their hands to their sides. The room quieted down. Elphaba made up a little song on the
spot, a song of longing and otherness, of far aways and future days. Strangers closed their eyes to
listen.
Boq did too. Elphaba had an okay voice. He saw the imaginary place she conjured up, a land
where injustice and common cruelty and despotic rule and the beggaring fist of drought didn’t work
together to hold everyone by the neck. No, he wasn’t giving her credit: fliphaba had a good voice. It
was controlled and feeling and not histrionic. He listened through to the end, and the song faded into
the hush of a respectful pub. Later, he thought: The melody faded like a rainbow after a storm, or like
winds calming down at last; and what was left was calm, and possibility, and relief.
“You next, you promised,” cried Elphaba, pointing at Fiyero, but nobody would sing again,
because she had done so well. Nessarose nodded to Nanny to wipe a tear from the corner of her eye.
“Elphaba says she’s not religious but see how feelingly she sings of the afterlife,” said
Nessarose, and for once no one was inclined to argue.
Early one morning, when the world was hoary with rimefrost, Grommetik arrived with a note
for Glinda. Ama Clutch, it seemed, was on her way out. Glinda and her roommates hurried to the
infirmary.
The Head met them there, and led them to a windowless alcove. Ama Clutch was thrashing
about in the bed and talking to the pillowcase. “Don’t put up with me,” she was saying wildly, “for
what will I ever do for you? I will abuse your good nature, duckie, and rest my oily locks upon your
fine close weave and I will be picking with my teeth at your lacy appliqued edge! You are a stupid
nuisance to allow it, I say! I don’t care about notions of service! It’s all bunk, I tell you, bunk!”
“Ama Clutch, Ama Clutch, it’s me,” said Glinda. “Listen, dear, it’s me! It’s your little
Galinda.”
Ama Clutch turned her head from side to side. “Your protest is insulting to your forebears!” she
went on, rolling her eyes toward the pillowcase again. “Those cotton plants on the banks of
Restwater didn’t allow themselves to be harvested so you could lie down like a mat and let any
filthy person slobber all over you with night drool! It don’t make a lick of sense!”
“Ama!” Glinda wept. “Please! You’re raving!”
“Aha, I see you have nothing to say to that,” said Ama Clutch with satisfaction.
“Come back, Ama, come back, one more time before you go!”

“Oh sweet Lurline, this is dreadful,” Nanny said. “Darlings, if I ever get like this, poison me,
will you?”
“She’s going, I can see it,” Elphaba said. “I saw it enough in Quadling Country, I know the
signs. Glinda, say what you need to say, quickly.”
“Madame Morrible, may I have privacy?” Glinda said.
“I will stay by your side and support you. It’s my duty to my girls,” said the Head, settling her
hamlike hands determinedly on her waist. But Elphaba and Nanny got up and elbowed her out of the
alcove, down the
hall, and through the door and closed it and locked it. Nanny clucked all the while, saying,
“Now, isn’t that nice of you, Madame Head, but no need. No need at all.”
Glinda gripped Ama Clutch’s hand. Beads of white sweat were forming like potato water on
the servant’s forehead. She struggled to pull her hand away but her strength was going. “Ama Clutch,
you’re dying,” Glinda said, “and it’s my fault.”
“Oh stop,” Elphaba said.
“It is,” Glinda said fiercely, “it is.”
“I’m not arguing that,” said Elphaba, “I just mean cut yourself out of the conversation; this is her
death, not your interview with the Unnamed God. Come on. Do something!”
Glinda grabbed the hands, both hands, even tighter. “I am going to magick you back,” she said
between gritted teeth. “Ama Clutch, you do as I say! I’m still your employer and your better, and you
have to obey me! Now listen to this spell and behave yourself!”
The Ama’s teeth gnashed, the eyes rolled, and the chin twisted knobbily, as if trying to impale
some invisible demon in the air above her bed. Glinda’s eyes shut and her jaw worked, and a thread
of sound, syllables incoherent even to herself, came spooling out from her blanched lips. “Hope you
don’t explode her like a sandwich,” muttered Elphaba.
Glinda ignored this. She hummed and worked, she rocked and panted. Ama Clutch’s eyelids
moved so frantically over the closed eyes that it looked as if her eye sockets were chewing her own
eyes. “Magicordium senssus ovinda clenx,” Glinda concluded out loud, “and if that doesn’t do it, I
give up; even the smells and bells of a full kit wouldn’t help, I think.”
On the straw pallet Ama Clutch fell back. A little blood ran from the outer edge of each eye.
But the wild turning motion of the focus had shuttered itself down. “Oh my dear,” she murmured, “so
you’re all right then, or am I dead now?”
“Not yet,” said Glinda. “Yes, dear Ama, yes, I’m fine. But sweetheart, I think you’re going.”
“Of course I am, the Wind is here, can’t you hear it?” Ama Clutch said. “No matter. Oh there’s
Elphie, too. Good-bye, my ducks. Stay out of the Wind until the time is right or you’ll be blown in
the wrong direction.”
Glinda said, “Ama Clutch, I have something to say to you-I have to make my apology-“
But Elphaba leaned forward, cutting Glinda off from Ama Clutch’s line of sight, and said, “Ama
Clutch, before you go, tell us who killed Doctor Dillamond.”
“Surely you know that,” Ama Clutch said.
“Make us sure,” Elphaba said.
“Well, I saw it, I mean nearly. It had just happened and the knife was still there”-Ama Clutch
worked for breath-“smeared with blood that hadn’t had a chance to dry.”
“What did you see? This is important.”
“I saw the knife in the air, I saw the Wind come to take Doctor Dillamond away, I saw the
clockwork turn and the Goat’s time stop.”
“It was Grommetik, wasn’t it,” Elphaba murmured, trying to get the old woman to speak the
words.

“Well, that’s what I’m saying, duckie,” said Ama Clutch.
“And did it see you, did it turn on you?” cried Glinda. “Did that make you ill, Ama Clutch?”
“It was my time to be ill,” said Ama Clutch gently, “so I couldn’t complain. And it is my time to
die, so leave me be. Just hold my hand, dear.”
“But the fault is mine-” began Glinda.
“You would do me more good if you hushed, sweet Galinda, my duck,” said Ama Clutch gently,
and patted Glinda’s hand. Then she closed her eyes and breathed in and out a couple of times. They
sat there in a silence that seemed peculiarly servant-class-Gillikinese, though it was hard, later on, to
explain why. Outside, Madame Morrible moved up and down the floorboards, pacing. Then they
imagined they heard a Wind, or an echo of a Wind, and Ama Clutch was gone, and the overly
subordinate pillowcase took a small spill of human juice from the edge of her slackened mouth.
The funeral was modest, a love-her-and-shove-her affair. Glinda’s close friends attended,
filling two pews, and in the second tier of the
chapel a flock of Amas made a professional coterie. The rest of the chapel was empty.
After the corpse in its winding sheet slid along the oiled chute to the furnace, the mourners and
colleagues retired to Madame Morrible’s private parlor, where she proved to have sanctioned no
expense in the refreshments. The tea was ancient stock, stale as sawdust, the biscuits were hard, and
there was no saffron cream or tamorna marmalade. Glinda said reprovingly to the Head, “Not even a
small bowl of cream?” and Madame Morrible answered, “My girl, I try to protect my charges from
the worst of the food shortages by judicious shopping and by going without myself, but I am not
wholly responsible for your ignorance. If only people would obey the Wizard absolutely, there
would be abundance. Don’t you realize that conditions verge on famine and cows are dying of
starvation two hundred miles from here? This makes saffron cream very dear in the market.” Glinda
began to move away, but Madame Morrible reached out a raft of cushiony, bulbous, bejeweled
fingers. The touch made Glinda’s blood run cold. “I should like to see you, and Miss Nessarose, and
Miss Elphaba,” said the Head. “After the guests leave. Please wait behind.”
“We’re nabbed for a lecture,” whispered Glinda to the Thropp sisters. “We have to be yelled
at.”
“Not a word about what Ama Clutch said-or that she came back,” said Elphaba urgently. “Got
that, Nessa? Nanny?”
They all nodded. Boq and Avaric, making their good-byes, said that the group was reconvening
at the pub in the Regent’s Parade. The girls agreed to meet them there after their interview with the
Head. They would manage a more honest memorial service for Ama Clutch at the Peach and
Kidneys.
When the small crowd had dispersed, only Grommetik clearing away the cups and crumbs,
Madame Morrible herself banked up the fire-a gesture of chumminess lost on no one-and sent
Grommetik away. “Later, thingy,” she said, “later. Go lubricate yourself in some closet somewhere.”
Grommetik wheeled away with, if it was possible, an offended air. Elphaba had to repress an urge to
kick it with the tip of her stout black walking boot.
“You too, Nanny,” Madame Morrible said. “A little break from your labors.”
“Oh no,” Nanny said. “Nanny doesn’t leave her Nessa.”
“Yes Nanny does. Her sister is perfectly capable of caring for her,” said the Head. “Aren’t you,
Miss Elphaba? The very soul of charity.”
Elphaba opened her mouth-the word soul always provoked her, Glinda knew-but closed it
again. She made a wincing nod toward the door. Without a word, Nanny got up to leave, but before
the door closed behind her Nanny said, “It’s not my place to complain, but really: no cream? At a
funeral?”

“Help,” said Madame Morrible when the door closed, but Glinda wasn’t sure if this was a
criticism of servants or a bid for sympathy. The Head rallied herself by arranging her skirts and the
vents and braids of her smart parlor jacket. In orangey copper sequins she looked like a huge,
upholstered, upended goldfish goddess. How ever did she get to be Head? Glinda wondered.
“Now that Ama Clutch has gone to ash, we shall, nay, we must move bravely on,” Madame
Momble began. “My girls, may I first ask you to recount the sad story of her last words. It is
essential therapy in your recovery from grief.”
The girls didn’t look at one another. Glinda, in this situation the spokesperson, took a breath
and said, “Oh, she spewed nonsense to the last.”
“No surprise, the dotty old thing,” said Madame Morrible, “but what nonsense?”
“We couldn’t make it out,” said Glinda.
“I had wondered if she talked about the death of the Goat.”
Glinda said, “Oh the Goat? Well I could hardly tell-“
“I suspected that, in her deranged condition, she might return to that critical moment. The dying
often try to make sense, at the last possible moment, of the puzzles of their lives. Useless effort, of
course. No doubt Ama Clutch was puzzled by what she came across, the Goat’s body, the blood.
And Grommetik.”
“Oh?” said Glinda faintly. The sisters beside her were careful not to stir.
“That terrible morning I was up early-at my spiritual meditations-and I noticed the light in
Doctor Dillamond’s lab. So I sent Grommetik over with a cheering pot of tea for the old Goat.
Grommetik
found the Animal slumped over a broken lens; he’d apparently stumbled and severed his own
jugular vein. Such a sad accident, born of academic zeal (not to say hubris) and a pitiful lack of
common sense. Rest, we all need rest, the brightest of us need our rest. Grommetik in its confusion
felt for a pulse-none to be found-and I surmise that is just when Ama Clutch arrived. To see dear
Grommetik splashed with the spurts of a strong circulatory pulse. Ama Clutch arrived out of
nowhere and none of her business, I might add, but let’s not malign the dead, shall we?”
Glinda gulped back new tears, and did not mention that Ama Clutch had mentioned seeing
something unusual the evening before, and had wandered out to check.
“I did always think that the shock of all that blood might have been the final straw that sent Ama
Clutch pitching back into her ailment. Incidentally, you see why I dismissed Grommetik just now. It’s
still very sensitive and suspects, I believe, that Ama Clutch thought it responsible for the Goat’s
slaughter.”
Glinda said waveringly, “Madame Morrible, you should know that Ama Clutch had never
suffered such a disease as I described to you. I invented it. But I didn’t assign it. I didn’t commit it to
her, or her to it.”
Elphaba looked at Madame Morrible steadily, keeping her interest modest. Nessarose’s
eyelashes fluttered. If Madame Morrible knew Glinda’s news already, her face didn’t give her away.
She looked as placid as a tethered rowboat. “Well, this only lends weight to my observations,” she
allowed. “There is an imaginative, even a prophetic power in your pointed little society skull, Miss
Glinda.”
The Head stood, her skirts rustling, wind through a field of wheat. “What I say now I say in
strictest confidence. I expect my girls to obey my command. Are we agreed?” She seemed to take
their stunned silence as assent. She looked down on them. That’s why she seems so like a fish,
Glinda suddenly thought. She hardly ever blinks.
“By an authority vested in me that is too high to be named, I have been charged with a crucial
task,” said the Head. “A task essential to the internal security of Oz. I have been working to fulfill

this task for some years, and the time is right, and the goods are at my disposal.” She scrutinized
them. They were the goods.
“You will not repeat what you hear in this room,” she said. “You
will not want to, you will not choose to, and you will not be able to. I am wrapping each one of
you in a binding cocoon as regards this very sensitive material. No”-she held up a hand at Elphaba’s
protest-“no you have no right to object. The deed is already done and you must listen and be open to
what I say.”
Glinda tried to examine herself to see if she felt wrapped, or bound, or spell-chilled. But she
only felt frightened and young, which may be close to the same thing. She glanced at the sisters.
Nessarose in her dazzling shoes was back in her chair, nostrils dilating in fright or excitement.
Elphaba on the other hand looked as stolid and cross as usual.
“You live in a little womb here, a tight little nest, girl with girl. Oh I know you have your silly
boys on the edge, forgettable things. Good for one thing only and not even reliable at that. But I
digress. I must say that you know little or nothing of the state of the nation today. You have no sense
of the pitch of unrest to which things have mounted. Setting communities on edge, ethnic groups
against one another, bankers against farmers and factories against shopkeepers. Oz is a seething
volcano threatening to erupt and burn us in its own poisonous pus.
“Our Wizard seems strong enough. Ah, hut is he? Is he really? He has a grasp of internal
politics. He’s no slouch at negotiating rates of exchange with the bloodsuckers of Ev or Jemmicoe or
Fliaan. He rules the Emerald City with an industry and an ability that the decaying knob-jawed Ozma
line never dreamed of. Without him we’d have been swept away in firestorm, years ago. We can but
be grateful. A strong fist does wonders in a rotten situation. Walk softly but carry a bit stick. I see I
offend. Well, a man is always good for the public face of power, no?
“Yes. But things are not always as they seem. And it has been clear for some time that the
Wizard’s bag of tricks would not do forever. There are bound to be popular uprisings-the stupid,
senseless kind, in which strong dumb people enjoy getting killed for the sake of political changes
that’ll be rolled back within the decade. Adds such meaning to meaningless lives, don’t you think?
One can’t imagine any other reason for it. At any rate, the Wizard needs some agents. He requires a
few generals. In the long run. Some people with managing skills. Some people with gumption.
“In a word, women.
“I have called you three girls in here. You are not women yet, but
the moment is closing in on you, faster than you might think. Despite my opinion as to your
behavior, I have had to single you out. There is more in each one of you than meets the eye. Miss
Nessarose, being the newest, you are the most hidden to me, but once you outgrow that fetching habit
of faith you will display a ferocious authority. Your bodily disorder is of no significance here. Miss
Elphaba, you are an isolate, and even in my binding spell you sit there stewing in scorn of every
word I say. This is evidence of great internal power and force of will, something I deeply respect
even when marshaled against me. You have shown no sign of interest in sorcery and I don’t claim
you have any natural aptitude. But your splendid lone-wolf spit and spirit can be harnessed, oh yes it
can, and you needn’t live a life of unfulfilled rage. And Miss Glinda: You have surprised yourself
with the talents at sorcery you possess. I knew you would. I had hoped your inclinations might rub
off on Miss Elphaba, but that they haven’t is only firmer proof of Miss Elphaba’s iron character.
“I see in your eyes you all question my methods. You think, somewhat wildly: Did Horrible
Morrible cause that nail to pierce my Ama Clutch’s foot, making me have to room with Elphaba?
Did she cause Ama Clutch to come downstairs and find the dead Goat, the better to get her out of the
way and require Nanny and thus Nessarose to show up on the scene? How flattering that you even
imagine I have such power.”

The Head paused and came near to blushing, which in her was something like the separating of
cream on a flame set too high. “I am a handmaiden at the service of superiors,” she continued, “and
my special talent is to encourage talent. In my own small way I have been called to a vocation of
education, and here I make my little contributions to history.
“Now to be specific. I want you to consider your futures. I would like to name you, to baptize
you as it were, as a trio of Adepts. In the long run I would like to assign you behind-the-scenes
ministerial duties in different parts of the country. I am empowered to do this, remember, by those
whose boot straps I am not worthy to lick.” But she looked smug, as if she thought herself quite
worthy enough, indeed, of attention from these mysterious forces. “Let us say you will be secret
partners of the highest level of government. You will be anonymous ambassadors of peace, helping
to restrain the unruly element among our less civilized populations. Nothing is decided yet, of
course, and you do have a say in the matter-a
say to me, and not to each other nor anyone else, as the spell goes-but I would like you to think
about it. I need-eventually-to place an Adept in Gillikin somewhere. Miss Glinda, with your middlerange social position and your transparent ambitions, you can slime your way into ballrooms of
margreaves and still be at home in the pigsties. Oh, don’t squirm so, your good blood is only on one
side and it’s not a terribly refined strain anyway. The Adept of Gillikin, Miss Glinda? Does it
appeal?”
Glinda could only listen. “Miss Elphaba,” said Madame Morrible, “full of the teenage scorn of
inherited position, you are nonetheless the Thropp Third Descending, and your great-grandfather, the
Eminent Thropp, is in his dotage. One day you will inherit what is left of Colwen Grounds, that
pretentious pile in Nest Hardings, and you could manage to be the Adept of Munchkinland. Your
unfortunate skin condition notwithstanding-indeed, perhaps because of it-you have developed a
feistiness and an iconoclasm that is just faintly appealing when it doesn’t nauseate. It will come in
service. Believe me.
“And Miss Nessarose,” she went on, “having grown up in Quadling Country, you will want to
return there with Nanny. The social situation in Quadling Country is such a mess, what with the
decimation of the squelchy froglet population, but it may come back, in small measure, and there
should be someone to oversee the ruby mines. We need someone to look after things in the South.
Once you recover from your religious mania, it’ll be a perfect setting. You don’t expect a life of high
society anyway, not without arms. After all, how can one dance without arms?
“As for the Vinkus, we don’t imagine we’ll need an Adept stationed there, at least not in your
lifetimes. The master plans eradicate any appreciable population in that godforsaken place.”
Here the Head paused and looked around. “Oh, girls. I know you are young. I know this grieves
you. You mustn’t think of it as a prison sentence, though, but an opportunity. You ask yourselves:
How will I grow in a position, albeit a silent one, of prominence and responsibility? How may my
talents flourish? How, my dears, how may I help my Oz?”
Elphaba’s foot twisted, caught the edge of a side table, and a cup and saucer fell to the floor
and smashed.
“You’re so predictable,” said Madame Morrible, sighing. “That’s what makes my job so easy.
Now girls, bound as you are to an oath of silence, I
bid you to go away and think on what I have said. Please don’t even try to discuss it together as
it’ll just give you a headache and cramps. You won’t be able to manage it. Sometime in the next
semester I will call each of you in here and you can give me your answer. And if you should choose
not to help your country in its hour of need She clasped her hands in a parody of despair. “Well, you
are not the only fish in the sea, are you?”
The afternoon had turned glowery, with heaps of plum-colored clouds in the north, beyond the

bluestone spires and steeples. The temperature had dropped twenty degrees since the morning, and
the girls kept their shawls pulled close as they walked to the pub. Nanny, shivering in the dirty wind,
cried, “And what did the old busybody have to say that I couldn’t be allowed to hear?”
But there was nothing they could say. Glinda couldn’t even meet the others’ eyes. “We’ll lift a
glass of champagne for Ama Clutch,” said Elphaba finally, “when we get to the Peach and Kidneys.”
“I’d settle for a spoonfui of real cream,” said Nanny. “How pinching that old sow is. No
respect for the dead.”
But Glinda found that the binding spell was deeper, cut closer than she had even understood. It
wasn’t merely that they couldn’t talk about it. Already she had begun-to lose the words about it, to
falter in her thinking, to fail to commit the interview to memory. There was the proposal. It was a
proposal, wasn’t it? Of some questionable proposition in (was it) the civil service? Doing somesome ballroom dancing, which didn’t make sense. Some laughing, a glass of champagne, a handsome
man taking off his cummerbund and pressing his starched cuffs against her neck, nibbling the
teardrop-shaped rubies at her ears . . . Talk softly but carry a bit stick. Or was it not a proposal but a
prophecy? A little friendly encouragement about the future? And she had been alone, the others
hadn’t been listening. Madame Morrible had spoken directly to her. A lovely testimony to Glinda’s .
. . potential. The chance to rise. Walk softly but marry a big prick. A man draping his evening tie on
a bedstead and rolling his diamond studs, nudging them with his nose, down the declivity of her
superior neck . . . It was a dream, Madame Morrible couldn’t have said that! She must be dazed with
grief. Poor Ama Clutch. It had only been a quiet word of condolence from the dear and
self-effacing Head, who found it hard to speak in public. But a man’s tongue between her legs, a
spoonful of saffron cream…
Nessarose said, “Catch her, I can’t, I’m-” and she sagged against Nanny’s bosom, and Glinda
swooned at the same moment. Elphaba thrust out strong arms and scooped Glinda in mid-collapse.
Glinda didn’t really lose consciousness, but the uncomfortable physical nearness of hawk-faced
Elphaba after that undesired act of desire made her want to shiver with revulsion and to purr at the
same time. “Steady on, girl, not here,” said Elphaba, “resist, come on!” Resist was just what Glinda
didn’t want to do. But after all, in the shadow of an apple cart, on the edge of the market where
merchants were selling the last fish of the day, cheap, well, this was hardly the place. “Tough, tough
skin,” said Elphaba, appearing to pull words from the back of her throat. “Come on, Glinda-you’ve
got better brains-come on! I love you too much, snap out of it, you idiot!”
“Well, really,” she said as Elphaba dumped her on a heap of moldy packing straw. “No need to
be so romantic about it!” But she felt better, as if a wave of illness had just passed.
“You girls, I tell you, the faints, it comes from those tight shoes,” said Nanny, huffing and
loosening Nessarose’s glamorous footwear. “Sensible folk wear leather or wood.” She massaged
Nessarose’s insteps for a minute, and Nessarose moaned and arched her back, but began in a few
moments to breathe more normally.
“Welcome back to Oz,” said Nanny after a while. “What goodies were you all snacking on, in
there with the Head?”
“Come on, they’re waiting,” said Elphaba. “No sense dawdling. Anyway, I’m afraid it might
rain.”
At the Peach and Kidneys, the rest of the gang had commandeered a table in an alcove several
steps above the main floor. They were well into their cups by that point in the afternoon, and it was
clear tears had been shed. Avaric sat slouched against the brick wall of the student den, one arm
slung around Fiyero and his legs stretched out in Shenshen’s lap. Boq and Crope were arguing about
something, anything, and Tibbett was singing an interminable song to Pfannee, who looked as if she
wanted to drive a dart into the thick of his thigh. “Ahh, the ladies,” slurred Avaric, and made as if to

rise.
They sang, and chattered, and ordered sandwiches, and Avaric
plunked down an embarrassment of coins to demand a salver of saffron cream, in Ama Clutch’s
memory. Money did wonders and the cream was found in the larder, which gave Glinda an uneasy
feeling, though she didn’t know why. They spooned the airy mounds into one another’s mouths,
sculpted with it, mixed it in their champagne, threw it in small gobbets at one another until the
manager came over and told them to get the hell out. They complied, grumbling. They didn’t know it
was the last time they would all be together, or they might have lingered.
A brisk rain had come and gone, but the streets were still noisy with runoff, and the lamplight
glistened and danced in the silvery black curvetts of water caught among the cobbles. Imagining the
possible brigand in the shadows, or the hungry wanderer lurking nearby, they stood close together.
“I’ve got an idea,” said Avaric, putting one foot this way and the other that, as if he were as flexible
as a man of straw. “Who’s man enough for the Philosophy Club tonight?”
“Oh, no you don’t,” said Nanny, who hadn’t had that much to drink.
“I want to go,” whined Nessarose, swaying more than usual.
“You don’t even know what it is,” said Boq, giggling and hiccuping.
“I don’t care, I don’t want to leave tonight,” Nessarose said. “We only have one another and I
don’t want to be left out, and I don’t want to go home!”
“Hush Nessa, hush hush, my pretty,” said Elphaba. “That’s not the place for you, or me either.
Come on, we’re going home. Glinda, come on.”
“I have no Ama now,” said wide-eyed Glinda, stabbing a finger toward Elphaba. “I am my own
agent. I want to go to the Philosophy Club and see if it’s true.”
“The rest can do what they want but we’re going home,” said Elphaba.
Glinda veered over toward Elphaba, who was homing in on a very uncertain-looking Boq.
“Now Boq, you don’t want to go to that disgusting place, do you?” Elphaba was saying. “Come on,
don’t let the boys make you do something you don’t want.”
“You don’t know me,” he said, appearing to address the hitching post. “Elphie, how do you
know what I want? Unless I find out? Hmmm?”
“Come with us,” said Fiyero to Elphaba. “Please, if we ask you politely?”
“I want to go too,” whined Glinda.
“Oh, come, Glinny-dinny,” said Boq, “maybe they’ll pick us. For old times’ sake, as never
was.”
The others had awakened a slumbering cab driver and hired his services. “Boq, Glinda, Elphie,
come on,” Avaric called from the window. “Where’s your nerve?”
“Boq, think about this,” Elphaba urged.
“I always think, I never feel, I never live,” he moaned. “Can’t I live once in a while? Just once?
Just because I’m short I’m not an infant, Elphie!”
“Not till now,” said Elphaba. Rather smarmy tonight, thought Glinda, and wrenched herself
away to climb into the cab. But Elphaba grabbed her by the elbow and pivoted her around. “You
can’t,” she whispered. “We’re going to the Emerald City.”
“I’m going to the Philosophy Club with my friends-“
“Tonight,” hissed Elphaba. “You little idiot, we have no time to waste on sex!”
Nanny had led Nessarose away already, and the cabbie clucked his reins and the equipage
lumbered away. Glinda stumbled and said, “What did you think you were just about to say? To say?”
“I already said it and I’m not saying it again,” said Elphaba. “My dear, you and I are going back
to Crage Hall tonight only to pack a valise. Then we’re away.”
“But the gates’ll be locked-“

“It’s over the garden wall,” said Elphaba, “and we’re going to see the Wizard, come what may
and hell to pay.”
Boq could not believe he was heading to the Philosophy Club at last. He hoped he wouldn’t
vomit at a crucial moment. He hoped he would remember the whole thing tomorrow, or at least some
kernel of it, despite the headache forming vengefully in the hollows at his temples.
The place was discreet, though it was the best known dive in Shiz. It hid behind a facade of
paneled-up windows. A couple of Apes roamed the street in front, bouncing troublemakers ahead of
time. Avaric counted
the party carefully as they fell from the cab. “Shenshen, Crope, me, Boq, Tibbett, Fiyero, and
Pfannee. Seven. Boy how’d we all fit in the cab, could hardly fit us I’d think.” He paid the cabbie
and tipped him, in some obscure homage still to Ama Clutch, and then pushed to the front of the silent
knot of companions. “Come on, we’re the right age and the right drunk,” he said, and to the
shadowed face at the window, “Seven. Seven of us, good sir.”
The face came forward to the glass and leered at him. “The name is Yackle, and I’m not a sir
nor am I good. What kind are you up to tonight, Master Fellow?” Speaking through the pane was a
crone, with random teeth and a shiny white-pink wig slipping westwards off her pearly scalp.
“Kind?” said Avaric, then more bravely, “Any kind.”
“I mean the tickets, sweetbread. Strutting and strumming on the sprung floor, or strumpeting in
the old wine cellars?”
“The works,” said Avaric.
“You understand house rules? The locked doors, the if-you-pay-you-play policy?”
“Give us seven, and hurry up about it. We’re not fools.”
“You never are fools,” said the beastly woman. “Well, here you are then, and come what may.
Or who may.” She affected a stance of virtue, like a painting of a unionist virgin saint. “Enter and be
saved.”
The door swung open, and they went down a flight of uneven brick steps. At the bottom of the
flight was a dwarf in a purple burnoose. He looked at their tickets, and said, “Where are you soft
things from? Out of town?”
“We’re all at the university,” said Avaric.
“A motley crew. Well, you’ve seven-of-diamond tickets. See here, the seven red diamonds
printed here, and here.” He said, “Have a drink on the house, watch the girlie show, and dance a
little if you want. Every hour or so I close this street door and open the next.” He pointed to a huge
oak door, barred with two monstrous timbers in iron hasps. “You all go in together or you don’t go
in at all. That’s the rule of the house.”
There was a chanteuse singing a send-up of “What Is Oz Without Ozma,” and teasing herself
with a parrot-colored feather boa. A small hand of elves-real elves!-tootled and rattled out a tinny
accompani
ment. Boq had never seen an elf, even though he knew there was a colony of them not far from
Rush Margins. “How weird,” he said, inching forward. They looked like hairless monkeys, naked
but for little red caps, and without any appreciable sex characteristics. They were as green as sin.
Boq turned to say, Look, Elphie, it’s like you had a passel of babies, but he didn’t see her and
remembered then that she hadn’t come. Nor had Glinda, apparently. Damn.
They danced. The crowd was the most mixed Boq had seen in some time. There were Animals,
humans, dwarfs, elves, and several tiktok things of incomplete or experimental gender. A squadron
of well-built blond boys circulated with tumblers of rotgut squash wine, which the friends drank
because it was free.
“I don’t know if I want to go any more daring than this,” said Pfannee to Boq at one point. “I

mean, look, that hussy of a Baboon is almost out of her dress. Perhaps we should call it a night.”
“Do you think?” said Boq. “I mean, I’m game, but if you’re feeling uneasy.” Oh hurrah, a way
out. He was feeling uneasy himself. “Well let’s get Avaric. He’s over there nosing up to Shenshen.”
But before they could make their way across the crowded dance floor, the elves began to let out
a banshee screech, and the singer thrust out her hip and said, “That’s the mating call, dollies! Ladies
and gentle-friends! We’re doing, and I do mean doing”-she glanced at a note in her hand-“five black
clubs, three black clubs, six red hearts, seven red diamonds, and-on their honeymoon, isn’t it sweet”she simulated gagging-“two black spades. Up to the mouth of everlasting bliss, fraidies and
gentlehens.”
“Avaric, no,” said Boq.
But the crone from the front, who called herself Yackle, came knocking through the hall-having
apparently locked up the front door for the time being-and she remembered the holders of the
designated cards, and brought them forward with a smile. “All rides, all riders, on the ready,” she
said, “here we be, at the shank end of the evening! Lighten up, lads, it’s not a funeral, it’s an
entertainment!” It had been a funeral, Boq remembered, trying to invoke the warm, self-effacing
spirit of Ama Clutch. But the time to back out, if such a time existed, had passed.
They were swept through the oak doors and along a slightly sloping
passage whose walls were padded in red and blue velvet. A merry tune was playing farther on,
a dancing ragged melody. A smell of roasting timm leaves-sweet and softening, you could almost
feel them turning up their purplish edges. Yackle led the way, and the twenty-three revelers
processed, in a confused state of apprehension, elation, and randiness. The dwarf followed behind.
Boq took stock, as best his stumbling mind could manage. An erect Tiger in hip boots and a cape. A
couple of bankers and their evening consorts, all wearing black masques: as a protection against
blackmail or as an aphrodisiac? A party of merchants from Ev and Fliaan, in town on business. A
couple of women rather long in the tooth, bedecked in costume jewelry. The honeymoon couple were
Glikkuns. Boq hoped that his crowd wasn’t gawping as much as the Glikkuns were. As he glanced
around, only Avaric and Shenshen looked eager-and Fiyero, possibly because he hadn’t yet grasped
what this was all about. The others looked more than a little squeamish.
They entered a small dark theatre-in-the-round, with the space for the public divided into six
stalls. Above, the ceiling was lost in a stony blackness. Tapers fluttered, and a hollow music issued
through fissures in the wall, increasing an unearthly air of dislocation and otherness. The stalls
circled and faced the central stage, which was enshrouded in black drapes. The stalls were
separated from one another by vertical strips of latticed wood and slats of mirror. All the parties
were being mixed up, all friends and partners separated. Was there incense in the air too? It seemed
to make Boq’s mind split in half, like a husk, and allow a tenderer, complacent mind to emerge. The
softer, more bruisable aspect, the private intention, the surrendering self.
He felt he was knowing less and less, and it was more and more beautiful to do so. Why had he
been alarmed? He was sitting on a stool, and around him in the stall sat, almost preternaturally near,
a man in a black masque, an Asp he hadn’t noticed before, the Tiger whose breath ran hot and meaty
on his neck, a beautiful schoolgirl, or was that the bride on her honeymoon? Did the whole stall then
tilt forward, like a gently swung bucket? Anyway, they leaned together toward the central dais, an
altar of veils and sacrifices. Boq loosened his collar and then his belt, felt the gingery appetite
between heart and stomach and the resulting stiffening apparatus below that. The music of pipes and
whistles was
slowing, or was it that as he watched and waited and breathed so, so slowly, that the secret
area inside himself uncloaked itself, where nothing mattered?
The dwarf, in a darker hood now, appeared on the stage. He could see from his vantage point

into all the stalls but the revelers in separate stalls couldn’t see one another. The dwarf leaned and
reached a hand here, there, welcoming, beckoning. He encouraged from one stall the figure of a
woman, from another a man (was it Tibbett?), and from the stall where Boq sat he gestured to the
Tiger. Boq felt only faintly sony not to be chosen himself as he watched the dwarf pass a smoking
vial beneath the nostrils of the three acolytes, and help them to remove their clothes. There were
shackles, and a tray of scented oils and emollients, and a chest whose contents were still in shadow.
The dwarf bound black blindfolds around the heads of the scholars.
The Tiger was pacing on all fours and growling softly, tossing his head back and forth in
distress or excitement. Tibbett-for it was he, though nearly out of consciousness-was made to lie on
his back on the floor of the stage. The Tiger strode over him and stood still while the dwarf and his
assistants lifted Tibbett and tied his wrists together, around the Tiger’s chest, and his ankles around
the Tiger’s pelvis, soTibbett hung beneath the Tiger’s belly, like a trussed pig, his face lost in the
Tiger’s chest hair.
The woman was set on a sloping stool, almost like a huge tilting bowl, and the dwarf tucked
something aromatic and runny up in the shadowy regions. Then the dwarf pointed to Tibbett, who
was beginning to twist and moan into the Tiger’s chest. “Let X be the Unknown God,” said the
dwarf, poking Tibbett in the ribs. The dwarf then slapped the Tiger on his flank with a riding crop,
and the Tiger strained forward, positioning his head between the woman’s legs. “Let Y be the
Dragon of Time in its cave,” said the dwarf, hitting the Tiger again.
As he laced the woman into the half-shell, stroking her nipples with a glowing salve, he handed
her a riding crop with which she could lash at the Tiger’s flanks and face. “And let Z be the Kumbric
Witch, and let us see if she exists tonight The crowd drew nearer, almost participants themselves,
and the musky sense of adventure made them tear at their own buttons and nibble their own lips,
leaning in, in, in.
“Such are the variables in our equation,” said the dwarf as the room
darkened even further. “So now, let the true, clandestine study of knowledge begin.”
The industrialists of Shiz, from an early stage wary of the growing power of the Wizard, had
elected not to lay down the rail line from Shiz to the Emerald City as originally planned. Therefore,
it was a good three days’ journey from Shiz to the Emerald City-and this was in the best of weather,
for the wealthy who could pay for a constant change of horses. For Glinda and Elphaba it took more
than a week. A bleak, cold-scoured week, as the winds of autumn ripped the leaves off trees with a
dry screech and a rattle of brittle, protesting limbs.
They rested, like other third-class travelers, in the back rooms above inn kitchens. In a single
lumpy bed, they huddled together for warmth and encouragement and, Glinda told herself, protection.
The others cooed and shrieked in the stableyard below, the kitchen maids came and went noisily, at
odd hours. Glinda would start as if from a frightful dream, and nestle in nearer to Elphaba, who
seemed at night never to sleep. Daytimes, the long hours spent in poorly sprung carriages, Elphaba
would nod off against Glinda’s shoulder. The land outside grew less succulent and varied. Trees
were crabbed, as if conserving their strength.
And then the sandy scrubland was domesticated by farm life. Overgrazed fields were dotted
with cows, their withers shriveled and papery, their lowing desperate. An emptiness settled in the
farmyards. Once Glinda saw a farm woman standing on her doorstep, hands sunk deep in apron
pockets, face lined with grief and rage at the useless sky. The woman watched the carriage pass, and
her face showed a yearning to be on it, to be dead, to be anywhere else other than on this carcass of a
property.
The farms gave way to deserted mills and abandoned granges. Then, abrupt and decisive, the
Emerald City rose before them. A city of insistence, of blanket declaration. It made no sense, clotting

up the horizon, sprouting like a mirage on the characterless plains of central Oz. Glinda hated it from
the moment she saw it. Brash upstart of a city. She
supposed it was her Gillikinese superiority asserting itself. She was glad of it.
The carriage passed through one of the northern gates, and the scramble of life aroused itself
again, but in an urban key, less restrained and self-forgiving than that of Shiz. The Emerald City was
not amused by itself, nor did it consider amusement a proper attitude for a city. Its high self-regard
sprang up in public spaces, ceremonial squares, parks and facades and reflecting pools. “How
juvenile, how devoid of irony,” murmured Glinda. “The pomp, the pretension!”
But Elphaba, who had passed through the Emerald City only once before, on her way up to Shiz,
had no interest in architecture. She had her eyes glued on the people. “No Animals,” she said, “not
so you can see, anyway. Maybe they have all gone underground.”
“Underground?” said Glinda, thinking of legendary menaces like the Nome King and his
subterranean colony, or dwarves in their mines in Glikkus, or the Time Dragon of the old myths,
dreaming the world of Oz from his airless tomb.
“In hiding,” said Elphaba. “Look, the poor-I mean are they the poor? The hungry of Oz? From
the failed farms? Or is it just the-the surplus? The expendable human selvage? Look at them, Glinda,
this is a real question. The Quadlings, having nothing, looked-more-than these-“
Off the boulevard on which they rode branched alleys, where shelves of tin and cardboard
served as roofs for the flood of indigents. Many of them were children, though some were the
diminutive Munchkinlanders, and some were dwarves, and some were Gillikinese bowed with
hunger and strain. The carriage moved slowly, and faces stood out. A Glikkun youth with no teeth
and no feet or calves, on his stumpy knees in a box, begging. A Quadling-“Look, a Quadling!” said
Elphaba, grabbing Glinda’s wrist. Glinda caught a glimpse of a ruddy brown woman in a shawl,
lifting a small apple to the child in a sling around her neck. Three Gihikinese girls dressed like
women for hire. More children in a pack, running and squealing like piglets, pressing up against a
merchant, to pick his pockets. Rag merchants with pushcarts. Kiosk keepers whose goods lay locked
beneath safety grilles. And a sort of civil army, if you could call it that, strolling in foursomes on
every second or third street, brandishing clubs, angular with swords.
They paid the carriage master and walked with their parcels of clothes toward the Palace. It
rose, in stepped-back fashion, a growth of domes and minarets, high flared buttresses in green
marble, blue agate screens in the recessed windows. Central and most prominent, the broad, gentlebrowed canopies of the pagoda lifted over the Throne Room, covered with hammered scales of
virgin gold, brilliant in the late afternoon gloom.
Five days later they had made it past the gatekeeper, the receptionists, and the social secretary.
They had sat for hours awaiting a three-minute interview with the Commander-General of
Audiences. Elphaba, a hard, twisted look on her face, had managed to eject the words “Madame
Morrible” from between her clamping lips. “Tomorrow at eleven,” said the Commander-General.
“You will have four minutes between the Ambassador to Ix and the Matron of the Ladies’ Home
Guard Social Nourishment Brigade. Dress code is formal.” He handed them a card of regulations
that, being unequipped with courtly dress, they were obliged to ignore.
At three the following afternoon (everything running late), the Ambassador to Ix left the Throne
Room looking agitated and splenetic. Glinda fluffed the bedraggled feathers in her traveling hat for
the eightieth time, and sighed, “Now you’re the one who says what should be said.” Elphaba nodded.
To Glinda she looked tired, terrified, but strong, as if her form were knit with iron and whiskey
instead of bones and blood. The Commander-General of Audiences appeared in the doorway of the
waiting salon.
“You have four minutes,” he said. “Do not approach until you are bade to do so. Do not speak

until you are addressed. Do not venture a remark unless it is to answer a comment or question. You
may refer to the Wizard as ‘Your Highness.”
“That sounds pretty regal to me. I thought that royalty had been-” But here Glinda elbowed
Elphaba to make her shut up. Really, Elphaba had no common sense sometimes. They hadn’t come so
far just to be turned away because of adolescent radicalism.
The Commander-General took no notice. As they approached a set of tall double doors, carved
with sigils and other occult hieroglyphs, the Commander-General mentioned, “The Wizard is not in a
good humor today due to the reports of a riot in the Ugabu district in the north of
Winkle Country. I should be prepared for what I find, were I you.” Two stoical doormen
opened the doors then, and they passed through.
But the throne did not lie before them. Instead, the antechamber led left, and through an archway
there was another, but on a shifting axis to the right, and another beyond that, and another. It was like
looking through a reflection of a corridor in mirrors set opposite each other; it veered inward. Or,
thought Glinda, like processing through the narrowing, deviating chambers of a nautilus. They made a
circuit through eight or ten salons, each slightly smaller than the other, each steeped in a curdled light
that fell from leaded panes above. At last the antechambers concluded at an archway into a
cavernous circular hall, higher than it was wide, and dark as a chapel. Antique wrought-iron stands
held ziggurats of molded beeswax burning with a multitude of wicks, and the air was close and
slightly floury. The Wizard was absent, though they saw the throne on a circular dais, inset emeralds
gleaming dully in the candlelight.
“He stepped out to use the toilet,” said Elphaba. “Well, we’ll wait.”
They stood at the archway, not daring to venture farther without invitation.
“If we only have four minutes, I hope this doesn’t count,” said Glinda. “I mean, it took us two
minutes just to get from there to here.”
“At this point-” said Elphaba, and then, “Shhhhh.”
Glinda shhhhhhed. She didn’t think she heard anything, then she wasn’t sure. There was no
change that she could identify in the gloom, but Elphaba looked like a pointer on alert. Her chin was
out, her nose high and nostrils flared, her dark eyes squinting and widening.
“What,” said Glinda, “what?”
“The sound of-“
Glinda heard no sounds, unless it was the hot air lifting from the flames into the chilly shadows
between dark rafters. Or was it the rustle of silk robes? Was the Wizard approaching? She looked
this way and that. No-there was a rustle, a sort of hiss, as of bacon rashers in a skillet. The candle
flames suddenly all genuflected, obeisant to a sour wind that beat from the area of the throne.
Then the dais was pelted with thick drops of rain, and a shudder of homegrown thunder blatted
out, more dropped kitchen kettles than timpani. On the throne was a skeleton of dancing lights; at first
Glinda
thought lightning, but then she realized it was luminescent bones hitched together to suggest
something vaguely human, or at least mammalian. The rib cage flexed open like two fretted hands,
and a voice spoke in the storm, not from the skull but from the dark eye of the storm where the heart
of the lightning creature should be, in the tabernacle of the rib cage.
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” it said, and shook the room with its related weather. “Who
are you?”
Glinda glanced at Elphaba. “Go on, Elphie,” she said, nudging her. But Elphaba looked
terrified. Well, of course, the rain. She had that thing about rainstorms.
“Whooo arrrre youuuu?” bellowed the thing, the Wizard of 0z, whatever.
“Elphie,” hissed Glinda. Then, “Oh, you useless thing, all talk and no-I’m Glinda from Frottica,

if you please, Your Highness, descended matrilineally from the Arduennas of the Upland, and this if
you please is Elphaba, the Thropp Third Descending from Nest Hardings. If you please.”
“And if I don’t please?” said the Wizard.
“Oh really, how like a child,” said Glinda under her breath. “Elphie, come on, I can’t say why
we’re here!”
But the banal comment of the Wizard’s seemed to snap Elphaba out of her terror. Staying where
she was at the edge of the room, gripping Glinda’s hand for support, Elphaba said, “We’re students
of Madame Morrible at Crage Hall in Shiz, Your Highness, and we’re in possession of some vital
information.”
“We are?” said Glinda. “Thanks for telling me.”
The small rain seemed to let up a bit, though the room stayed dark as an eclipse. “Madame
Morrible, that paragon of paradoxes,” said the Wizard. “Vital information of her, I wonder?”
“No,” said Elphaba. “That is, it is not for us to interpret what we hear. Gossip is unreliable.
But-“
“Gossip is instructive,” said the Wizard. “It tells which way the wind is blowing.” The wind
then blew in the direction of the girls, and Elphaba danced back to avoid being spattered. “Go ahead,
girls, gossip.”
“No,” said Elphaba. “We’re here on more important business.”
“Elphie!” said Glinda. “Do you want to get us thrown in prison?”
“Who are you to decide what is important business?” roared the Wizard.
“I keep my eyes open,” said Elphaba. “You didn’t call us here to ask for our gossip; we came
with our own agenda.”
“How do you know I didn’t call you here?”
Well, they didn’t know, especially after whatever it was had happened to them at tea with
Madame Morrible. “Scale down, Elphie,” whispered Glinda, “you’re making him mad.”
“So what?” Elphaba said. “I’m mad.” She spoke up again. “I have news of the murder of a great
scientist and a great thinker, Your Highness. I have news of important discoveries that he was
making, and their suppression. I have every interest in the pursuit of justice and I know you do too,
so that the amazing revelations of Doctor Dillamond will help you to reverse your recent judgments
on the rights of Animals-“
“Doctor Dillamond?” said the Wizard. “Is that all this is about?”
“It is about an entire population of Animals systematically deprived of their-“
“I know of Doctor Dillamond and I know of his work,” said the glowing bones of the Wizard,
snorting. “Derivative, unauthenticated, specious garbage. What you’d expect of an academic Animal.
Predicated on shaky political notions. Empiricism, quackery, tomfoolery. Cant, rant, and rhetoric.
Were you taken in perhaps by his enthusiasm? His Animal passion?” The skeleton danced a jig, or
perhaps it was a twitch of disgust. “I know of his interests and his findings. I know little of what you
call his murder and I care less.”
“I am not a slave to emotions,” Elphaba said sternly. She was pulling papers from her sleeve,
where she had apparently rolled them up around her arm. “This is not propaganda, Your Highness.
This is a well-argued Theory of Consciousness Inclination, is what he calls it. And you will be
amazed to learn of his discoveries! No right-thinking ruler can afford to ignore the implica-“
“That you presume me to be right-thinking is touching,” said the Wizard. “You may drop the
things where you stand. Unless you prefer to approach?” The lightning-marionette grinned and
stretched out its arms. “My pet?”
Elphaba dropped the papers. “Good, my Lord,” she said in a piercing, pretentious voice, “I
shall take you to be right-thinking, for did I not, I should be obliged to join an army against you.”

“Oh hell, Elphie,” said Glinda, then more loudly, “she doesn’t speak for the both of us, Your
Highness, I’m an independent person here.”
“Please,” said Elphaba, at once hard and soft, proud and pleading. Glinda realized she had
never before witnessed Elphaba wanting anything. “Please, sir. The hardship on the Animals is more
than can be borne. It isn’t just the murder of Doctor Dillamond. It’s this forced repatriation, this-this
chattelizirig of free Beasts. You must get out and see the sorrow. There is talk of-there is worry that
the next step will be slaughter and cannibalism. This isn’t merely youthful outrage. Please, sir. This
is not untrammeled emotion. What’s happening is immoral-“
“I do not listen when anyone uses the word immoral,” said the Wizard. “In the young it is
ridiculous, in the old it is sententious and reactionary and an early warning sign of apoplexy. In the
middle-aged, who love and fear the idea of moral life the most, it is hypocritical.”
“If not immoral, then what word can I use to imply wrong?” said Elphaba.
“Try mysterious and then relax a little. The thing is, my green girlie, it is not for a girl, or a
student, or a citizen to assess what is wrong. This is the job of leaders, and why we exist.”
“But then nothing would keep me from assassinating you, did I not know what wrong was.”
“I don’t believe in assassination, I don’t even know what it means,” Glinda called. “Yoo boo.
I’m going to take my leave now while I’m still alive.”
“Wait,” said the Wizard. “I have something to ask you.”
They stood still. They stood for minutes. The skeleton fingered its ribs, played them like the
brittle strings of a harp. Music like stones turning over in a streambed. The skeleton collected its
lighted teeth from its jaws and juggled them. Then it tossed them at the seat of the throne, where they
exploded in candy-colored flashes. The rain was running down a drain in the floor, Glinda noticed.
“Madame Morrible,” said the Wizard. “Agent provocateur and gossip, crony and companion,
teacher and minister. Tell me why she sent you here.”
“She didn’t,” said Elphaba.
“Do you even know the meaning of the word pawn?” shrieked the Wizard.
“Do you know what resistance means?” Elphaba shot back.
But the Wizard only laughed instead of killing them on the spot. “What does she want of you?”
Glinda spoke up; it was about time. “A decent education. For all her bombastic ways she’s a
capable administrator. It can’t be easy.” Elphaba was staring at her with a queer, slanted look.
“Has she brought you in-?”
Glinda didn’t quite understand. “We’re only sophisters. We have only begun to specialize. I in
sorcery, Elphaba in life sciences.”
“I see.” The Wizard seemed to consider. “And after you graduate next year?”
“I suppose I’ll go back to Frottica and get married.”
“And you?”
Elphaba didn’t answer.
The Wizard turned itself around, broke off its femurs, and pounded the seat of the throne as if it
were a kettledrum. “Really, this is getting ridiculous, it’s all pleasure faith showbiz,” said Elphaba.
She took a step or two forward. “Excuse me, Your Highness? Before our time is up?”
The Wizard turned back. Its skull was on fire, a fire not quenched by the thickening curtain of
rain. “I shall say one last thing,” the Wizard ventured, in a voice like a groan, a voice of one in pain.
“I shall quote from the Oziad, the hero tale of ancient Oz.”
The girls waited.
The Wizard of Oz recited:
“Then hobbling like a glacier, old Kumbricia
Rubs the naked sky till it rains with blood.

She tears the skin off the sun and eats it hot.
She tucks the sickle moon in her patient purse.
She bears it out, a full-grown changeling stone.
Shard by shard she rearranges the world.
It looks the same, she says, but it is not.
It looks as they expect, but it is not.
“Beware whom you serve,” said the Wizard of Oz. Then he was gone, and the gutters in the
floor gurgled, and the candles went instantly out. There was nothing for them to do but retrace their
steps.
At the carriage, Glinda had settled in and made a little nest for them in the desirable forwardfacing seat, guarding Elphaba’s place against three other passengers. “My sister,” she lied, “I am
saving this seat for my sister.” And how I have changed, she thought, in a year and some. From
despising the colored girl to claiming we are blood! So university life does change you in ways you
cannot guess. I may be the only person in all the Pertha Hills ever to meet our Wizard. Not on my
own steam, not of my initiative-still, I was there. I did it. And we’re not dead.
But we didn’t accomplish much.
Then, there was Elphie, at last, barreling along the paving stones with her elbows jutting and
her thin bony torso swathed against the elements, as usual, in a cape. She came up through the crowd,
batting at more refined passengers to get past, and Glinda shoved open the door. “Thank heavens, I
thought you’d be late,” she said. “The driver is eager to leave. Did you get a lunch for us?”
Elphaba tossed in her lap a couple of oranges, a hunk of unrepentant cheese, and a loaf of bread
that filled the compartment with pungent staleness. “This’ll have to do you till your stop this
evening,” she said.
“Me, me?” said Glinda. “What do you mean, me? Have you got something better to eat for
yourself?”
“Something worse, I expect,” said Elphaba, “but needs to be done. I’ve come to say good-bye.
I’m not going back with you to Crage Hall. I’ll find a place to study on my own. I’ll not be part ofMadame Morrible’s-school-again-“
“No, no,” cried Glinda, “I can’t let you! Nanny will eat me alive! Nessarose will die! Madame
Morrible will-Elphie, no. No!”
“Tell them I kidnapped you and made you come here, they’ll believe that of me,” said Elphaba.
She stood on the mounting tread. A fat Glikkun female dwarf, having caught the gist of the drama,
shifted to the more comfortable seat next to Glinda. “They needn’t look for me, Glinda, for I’m not
going to be findable. I’m going down.”
“Down where? Back to Quadling Country?”
“That would be telling,” Elphaba said. “But I won’t lie to you, my dear. No need to lie. I don’t
know yet where I’m going. I haven’t decided so I wouldn’t have to lie.”
“Elphie, get in this cab, don’t be a fool,” Glinda cried. The driver was adjusting the reins and
yelling at Elphaba to sod off.
“You’ll be all right,” Elphaba said, “now you’re a seasoned traveler. This is just the return leg
of a voyage you already know.” She put her face against Glinda’s and kissed her. “Hold out, if you
can,” she murmured, and kissed her again. “Hold out, my sweet.”
The driver clucked the reins, and pitched a cry to leave. GlInda craned her head to see Elphaba
drift back into the crowds. For all her singularity of complexion, it was astounding how quickly she
became camouflaged in the ragamuffin variety of street life in the Emerald City. Or maybe it was
foolish tears blurring Glinda’s vision. Elphaba hadn’t cried, of course. Her head had turned away
quickly as she stepped down, not to hide her tears but to soften the fact of their absence. But the

sting, to Glinda, was real.

Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West

Book 3 - City of Emeralds
On a clammy late summer evening about three years after graduating from Shiz University,
Fiyero stopped at the unionist chapel in Saint Glinda’s Square, to pass some time before meeting a
fellow countryman at the opera.
Fiyero hadn’t taken to unionism as a student, but he had developed an eye for frescoes that often
adorned the cubbyholes of older chapels. He was hoping to find a portrait of Saint Glinda. He had
not seen Glinda of the Arduennas of the Uplands since her graduation-she had finished a year before
he did. But he hoped it wouldn’t be sacrilegious to light a charmwax candle in front of Saint
Glinda’s likeness, and to think of her namesake.
A service was ending, and the congregation of sensitive adolescent boys and black-scarved
grandmothers drifted slowly out. Fiyero waited until the lyre player in the nave had finished
fingering a tricky diminuet, then he approached her. “Do forgive me-I’m a visitor from the west.”
Well obviously, with his rich ochre skin color and tribal markings. “I don’t see a sexton-a verger-a
sacristan, whatever the word is-nor can I find a pamphlet to tell me-I was looking to find an ikon of
Saint Glinda?”
Her face remained grave. “You’ll be lucky if it hasn’t been papered over with a poster of Our
Glorious Wizard. I’m an itinerant musician, only through this way once in a while. But I think you
might look in the last aisle; there’s an oratory to Saint Glinda, or used to be. Good luck.”
Locating it-a tomblike space with an archer’s slit instead of a true window-Fiyero saw, lit by a
pinkish sanctuary light, a smoky image of the Saint, leaning a bit to the right. The portrait was merely
sentimental and not robustly primitive, a disappointment. Water damage had made great white stains
like laundry soap mistakes on the Saint’s holy garments. He couldn’t remember her particular legend,
nor the uplifting way that she had gagged on death for the sake of her soul and for the edifica tion of
her admirers.
But then he saw, in the underwatery shadows, that the oratory was inhabited by a penitent. The
head was bowed in prayer, and he was about to move away when it struck him that he knew who it
was.
“Elphaba!” he said.
She turned her head slowly; a lace shawl dropped to her shoulders. Her hair was looped on her
head and skewered with ivory hair
corkscrews. Her eyes batted once or twice slowly, as if she were moving toward him from a
great distance away. He had interrupted her at prayer-he hadn’t remembered her to be religiousmaybe she didn’t recognize him.
“Elphaba, it’s Fiyero,” he said, moving into the doorway, blocking her exit, and also the lightsuddenly he couldn’t see her face, and wondered if he heard correctly when she said, “I beg your
pardon, sir?”
“Elphie-I’m Fiyero-we were at Shiz,” he said. “My splendid Elphie-how are you?”
“Sir, I believe you are mistaking me for someone else,” she said, in Elphaba’s voice.
“Elphaba, the Thropp Third Descending, if I remember the nomenclature,” he said, laughing
stoutly, “I’m not mistaken at all. I’m Fiyero of the Arjikis-you know me, you remember me! From
Doctor Nikidik’s lectures in the life sciences!”
“You have confused yourself,” she said, “sir.” That last word sounded a bit shirty, absolutely
Elphaba. “Now you don’t mind if I am about my devotions in peace?” She drew her shawl up above
her head, and arranged it to fall about her temples. The chin in profile could slice a salami, and even
in the low light he knew he wasn’t wrong.

“What is it?” he said. “Elphie-well, Miss Elphaba, if you require-don’t shab me off like this. Of
course it’s you. There’s no disguising you. ‘What game are you about?”
She didn’t answer him in words, but by telling her beads ostentatiously she was telling him to
get lost.
“I’m not going,” he said.
“You’re interrupting my meditation, sir,” she said softly. “Do I have to call the verger and have
you removed?”
“I’ll meet you outside,” he said. “How long do you need to pray? Half an hour? An hour? I’ll
wait.”
“In an hour, then, across the street; there’s a small public fountain with some benches. I’ll talk
with you for five minutes, five minutes only, and show you that you’ve made a mistake. Not a serious
one, but increasingly annoying to me.”
“Forgive the intrusion. In an hour then-Flphaba.” He wasn’t going to let her get away with
whatever game she was playing. He withdrew, however, and went to the musician at the back of the nave. “Is there another exit to this
building besides the main doors?” he asked, over her spurts of arpeggio. VVhen it was convenient to
answer him, she tucked her head and moved her eyes. “Side door through to the cloister of the
maunts, it’s not open to the public, but you can get out to a servants’ delivery alley through there.”
He lingered in the shadow of a pillar. In about forty minutes, a cloaked figure entered the chapel
and moved, hobbling with a cane, directly to the oratory Elphie occupied. He was too far away to
hear if words were exchanged, or anything else. (Perhaps the newcomer was merely another disciple
of Saint GlInda, and wanted solitude to pray.) The figure didn’t linger; it left again as quickly as its
stiffjoints would allow.
Fiyero dropped an offering in the poor box-a note, so to avoid the clink of coin. In a quarter of
the city so infested with the urban poor, his situation of comparative wealth required the penitential
gift, though his motivation was characterized more by guilt than charity. Then he slipped out through
the side door, into an overgrown cloister garden. Some ancient women in wheeled chairs were
chortling at the far end and didn’t notice him. He wondered if Elphaba belonged to this community of
monastic nuns-maunts, they were called. He now remembered that they were females living in that
most paradoxical of institutions: a community of hermits. Apparently, however, their vows of silence
were revoked in the decay of old age. He decided that Elphaba couldn’t have changed that much in
five years. So he let himself out the servants’ entrance, into an alleyway.
Three minutes passed, and Elphaba emerged from the same servants’ entrance, as he had
suspected she would. She was intent on avoiding him! Why, why? The last he had seen of her-he
remembered it wdll!-was the day of Ama Clutch’s funeral, and the drunken party at the pub. She had
fled to the Emerald City on some obscure mission, never to return, while he had been dragged off to
the eye-opening joys and terrors of the Philosophy Club. Rumor held that the great-grandfather, the
Eminent Thropp, had engaged agents to look for her in Shiz, in the Emerald City. From Elphaba
herself there was never a postcard, never a message, never a clue. Nessarose had been inconsolable
at first, and then grew to resent her sister’s putting her through this pain of separation. Nessa had lost
herself deeper in religion, to the point where her friends had begun to avoid her.
Tomorrow Fiyero would make his apologies for missing the opera and standing up his business
colleague. Tonight he would not lose Elphaba. As she hurried through the streets, checking over her
shoulder more than once, he thought: If you were trying to lose someone, if you did think someone
was on your trail, this is the time of day to do it-not because of shadows, but because of light.
Elphaba kept turning corners into the summer sun that, setting, was bowling blinding shafts of light
along side streets, through arcades, over the walls of gardens.

But he had had many years of practice at stalking animals under similar conditions-nowhere in
0z was the sun as much an adversary as in the Thousand Year Grasslands. He knew to squint his eyes
and follow the persistence of motion, and forget about identifying by shape. He also knew how to
duck sideways without tipping over or losing his balance, how to crouch suddenly, how to look for
other clues that the prey had begun to move again-the startled birds, the change in sound, the
disrupted wind. She could not lose him, and she could not know he was on her trail.
So he wound halfway across the city, from the elegant city centre to the low-rent warehouse
district, in whose shadowy doorways the destitute made their malodorous homes. Within spitting
distance of an army barracks, Elphaba stopped before a boarded-up corn exchange, ferreted a key
from some inner pocket, and opened the door.
He caited from a short distance, in an ordinary voice-“Fabala!” Even in the act of turning she
caught herself and tried to rearrange her expression. But it was too late. She had shown that she
recognized him, and she realized it. His foot was blocking the way before she could slam the heavy
door shut.
“Are you in trouble?” he asked.
“Leave me alone,” she said, “please. Please.”
“You’re in trouble, let me in.”
“You’re trouble. Stay out.” Pure Elphaba. His last doubts fled. He cracked the door open with
his shoulder.
“You’re making me into a monster,” he said, grunting with the effort-she was strong. “I’m not
going to rob you or rape you. I just- won’t-be ignored like that. Why?”
She gave up then, and he fell stupidly against the unplastered brick wall of the stairwell, like a
pratfalling twit in a vaudeville hour. “I remem
bered you as full of delicacy and grace,” she said. “Did you catch something by accident, or did
you study awkwardness?”
“Come on,” he said, “you force someone to behave like a clumping boor, you give them no
choice. Don’t be so surprised. I can still manage grace. I can do delicacy. Half a minute.”
“Shiz got to you,” she said, eyebrows up, but mockingly; she wasn’t really surprised. “Listen to
those graduate school affectations. Where’s the native boy reeking that appealing naivete like a wellchosen musk?”
“You’re looking well too,” he said, a bit hurt. “Do you live in this stairwell or are we going
someplace even a little bit homey?”
She cursed and mounted the stairs; they were covered with mouse turds and scraps of packing
straw. A soupy evening light seeped in the grimy gray glass windows. At a bend in the stairs a white
cat was waiting, haughty and disaffected like all its kin. “Malky, Malky, miaow miaow,” said
Elphaba as she passed it, and it deigned to follow her up to the pointy arched doorway at the top of
the stairs.
“Your familiar?” said Fiyero.
“Oh, that’s rich,” said Elphaba. “Well, I’d as soon be thought a witch as anything else. Why not.
Here Malky, some milk.”
The room was large and seemed only casually arranged for dwelling. Originally a storeroom, it
had barricaded double doors that could be swung outward, to receive or dispense sacks of grain
hauled up by a winch from the street. The only natural light fell in through a couple of cracked panes
of glass in a skylight open four or five inches. Pigeon feathers and white-and-bloody flux on the floor
below. Eight or ten crates in a circle, as if for sitting. A bedroll. Clothes folded on a trunk. Some
odd feathers, bits of bones, strung teeth, and a wizened dodo claw, brown and twisted like beefjerky:
These were hung on nails pounded into the wall, and arranged for art or for a spell. A sallowwood

table-a nice piece of furniture, that!-whose three arching legs tapered down into elegantly carved
doe’s hooves. A few tin plates, red with white speckles, some food wrapped in cloth and cord. A
pile of books at the bedside. A cat toy tied to a string. Most effectively, and gruesomely, the skull of
an elephant hung on a rafter, and a bouquet of dried creamy pink roses emerged from the central hole
in the hull of its cranium-like the exploding brains of a dying animal, he couldn’t help thinking,
remembering Elphaba’s youthful
concerns. Or maybe an homage to the putative magical talents of elephants?
Below it hung a crude glass oval, scratched and chipped, used as a looking glass, perhaps,
though its reflective qualities appeared unreliable.
“So this is home,” said Fiyero as Elphaba brought out some food for the cat and ignored Fiyero
some more.
“Ask me no questions and I’ll spell you no lies,” she said.
“May I sit down?”
“That’s a question”-but she was grinning-“oh, well then, sit for ten minutes and tell me about
yourself. How did you of all people turn into a sophisticate?”
“Appearances are deceiving,” he said. “I can afford the garb and affect the language, but I’m
still an Arjiki tribal boy underneath.”
“What is your life like?”
“Is there something to drink? Not alcohol-I’m just thirsty.”
“I don’t have running water. I don’t use it. There’s some questionable milk-at least Malky will
still drink it-or perhaps there’s a bottle of ale upthere on the shelf-help yourself.”
She took a little ale in a pipkin, left the rest for him.
He told her the barest outline of things. His wife, Sarima, the childhood bride grown up and
grown fecund-their three children. The old Office of Public Works waterworks headquarters at
Kiamo Ko, which by ambush and occupation his father had converted to a chieftain’s seat and a
tribal stronghold back in the time of the Ozma Regent. The dizzying schizoid life of moving every
year from the Thousand Year Grasslands in the spring and summer, where the clan hunted and
feasted, to a more settled autumn and winter at Kiamo Ko. “An Arjiki prince has business interests
here in the Emerald City?” said Elphaba. “If it were banking you’d be in Shin. The business of this
city is military, my old friend. What are you up to?”
“You’ve heard enough from me,” he said. “I can play coy and deceptive too, even if it’s all
pretend and no dark secrets to speak of.” He guessed the quiet business of trade agreements would
not Impress his old friend; he was embarrassed his affairs weren’t more audacious or thrilling. “But
I’ve gone on. What of you, Elphie?”
She wouldn’t say anything for a few minutes. She unrolled some dried sausage and some
graying bread, and found a couple of oranges and
a lemon, and put them unceremoniously on the table. In the mothy atmosphere she looked more
like a shadow than a person; her green skin seemed oddly soft, like spring leaves at their tenderest,
and beaten, like copper. He had an unprecedented urge to grab her wrist and make her stop moving
about-if not to make her talk, at least to keep her still, so he could look at her.
“Eat this stuff,” she said at last. “I’m not hungry. You eat it, go on.”
“Tell me something,” he begged. “You left us at Shiz-you disappeared like the morning fog.
Why, where to, and what then?”
“How poetic you are,” she said. “I’ve a notion that poetry is the highest form of selfdeception.”
“Don’t change the subject.”
But she was agitated. Her fingers twitched; she called for the cat, and then irritated it and sent it

flying off her lap. Finally she said, “Oh well, this much then. But you’re never to come here again. I
don’t want to have to find a new place, this is too good for me. Do you promise?”
“I will agree to consider promising, that’s all. How can I promise any more than that? I don’t
know a thing yet.”
She said, hurriedly, “Well, I was fed up with Shin. The death of
Doctor Dillamond vexed me, and everybody grieved and nobody cared.
Not really. It wasn’t the right place for me anyway, all those silly girls.
Although I liked Glinda well enough. How is she anyway?”
“I’m not in touch. I keep expecting to run into her at some Palace reception or other. I hear
through the grapevine that she married a Paltos baronet.”
Elphaba looked annoyed and her back stiffened. “Only a baronet? Not a baron or a viscount at
least? What a disappointment. Her early promise was never to pan out, then.” Meant as a joke, her
remark was stiff and unfunny. “Is she a mother?”
“I don’t know. I’m asking the questions now, remember?”
“Yes, but Palace receptions?” she said. “Are you in cahoots with Our Glorious Wizard?”
“I hear he’s mostly gone reclusive. I’ve never met him,” Fiyero said.
“He shows up at the opera and listens behind a portable screen. At his
own formal dinners he dines apart, in an adjoining chamber behind a
carved marble grill. I’ve seen a profile of a stately man walking along a
promenade. If that’s even the Wizard, that’s all I’ve met of him. But you, you:you. Why did you
cut us all off?”
“I loved you too much to keep in touch.”
“What does that mean?”
“Don’t ask me,” she said, thrashing a bit, her arms like oars rowing in the blue summer evening
lightlessness.
“Yes, I am asking. Have you lived here ever since? For five years? Do you study? Do you
work?” He rubbed his bare forearms as he tried to guess about her: What would she be up to? “Are
you associated with the Animal Relief League, or one of those defiant little humanitarian
organizations?”
“I never use the words humanist or humanitarian, as it seems to me that to be human is to be
capable of the most heinous crimes in nature.”
“You’re evading again.”
“That’s my job,” she said. “There, that’s a clue for you, dear Fiyero.”
“Amplify.”
“I went underground,” she said softly, “and I am still underground. You’re the first one to crack
my anonymity since I said good-bye to Glinda five years ago. So you now know why I can’t say any
more, or why you can’t see me again. For all I know you will turn me in to the Gale Force.”
“Hah! Those martinets! You think very little of me if you think I-“
“How do I know, how could I know?” She twisted her fingers together, a puzzle of green sticks.
“They march in those boots all over the poor and the weak. They terrify households at three in the
morning and drag away dissenters-and break up printing presses with their axes-and hold mock trials
for treason at midnight and executions at dawn. They rake over every quarter of this beautiful, false
city. They harvest a crop of victims on a monthly basis. It’s government by terror. They could be
massing on the street right now. Never having yet followed me, they may have followed you.”
“You’re not as hard to follow as you think,” he told her. “You’re good but not that good. I could
teach you a few things.”
“I bet you could,” she said, “but you won’t, for we won’t meet again. It’s too dangerous, for you

as well as for me. That’s what I mean when I say I loved you all too much to keep in touch. Do you
think the
Gale Force is above torturing friends and family to get at sensitive information? You’ve got a
wife and children, and I’m merely an old college friend you ran into once. Clever you to have
followed me. Never again, do you hear? I will move ff1 find you’re trailing me. I can pick up right
now, and be away in thirty seconds. It’s my training.”
“Don’t do this to me,” he said.
“We’re old friends,” she said, “but we’re not even especially good friends. Don’t turn this into
a sentimental rendezvous. It’s nice to see you but I don’t ever want to see you again. Take care of
yourself and beware high connections with bastards, because when the revolution comes there won’t
be mercy for toadying ass-lickers.”
“At what-twenty three years old?-you’re playing the Lady Rebel?” he said. “It’s not becoming.”
“It’s unbecoming,” she agreed. “A perfect word for my new life. Unbecoming. I who have
always been unbecoming am becoming un. Though I point out you are the same age as I, and prancing
about as a prince. But have you eaten enough? We have to say good-bye now.”
“We don’t,” he said, firmly. He wanted to take her hands in his- he didn’t remember that he’d
ever touched her before. He corrected himself-he knew he never had.
It was almost as if she could read his mind. “You know who you are,” she said, “but you don’t
know who I am. You can’t-I mean you can’t and you can’t-it’s not allowed, for one, and you’re not
capable for the other. Godspeed, if they use that phrase in the Vinkus-if it’s not a curse. Godspeed,
Fiyero.”
She handed him his opera cape, and held out her hand to shake his. He grabbed her hand, and
looked up into her face, which just for a second had fallen open. What he saw there made him chill
and hot flash, in dizzying simultaneity, with the shape and scale of its need.
“What do you hear of Boq?” she asked, the next time they met.
“You just won’t answer me anything about yourself, will you?” he said. He was lounging with
his feet up on her table. “Why did you finally agree to let me come back if you keep yourself locked
up like a prisoner?”
“I rather liked Boq, that’s all.” She grinned. “I let you come back so I could pump you for news
of him, and of the others.”
He told her what he knew. Boq had married Miss Milla, of all surprising turns. She had been
dragged out to Nest Hardings, and she hated it. She kept trying suicide. “His letters sent at
Lurlinemas every year are hysterical; they annotate her failed attempts at killing herself like a sort of
annual family report.”
“It makes me wonder, in the same circumstances, what my mother must have gone through,” said
Elphaba. “The privileged childhood in the big home of the ascendancy, then the rude shock of a hard
life out there in nowhere-land. In Mama’s case, from Colwen Grounds to Rush Margins, then the
Quadling lowlands. It’s actually a penance of the most severe sort.”
“Like mother like daughter,” said Fiyero. “Haven’t you left a certain amount of privilege
yourself, to live here like a snail? Hidden and private?”
“I remember the first time I saw you,” she said, shaking drops of vinegar over the roots and
vegetables she was preparing for a supper. “It was in that lecture hall of what’s-his-name-Doctor .
“Doctor Nikidik,” said Fiyero. He blushed.
“You had those beautiful markings on your face-I’d never seen such before. Did you plan that
entrance, to win your way into our hearts?”
“On my honor, could I have done anything else, I would have. I was both mortified and
terrified. Do you know, I thought those enchanted antlers were going to kill me? And it was prancing

Crope and ffibberty Tibbett who saved me.”
“Crope and Tibbett! Tibbett and Crope! I’d forgotten all about them. How are they?”
“Tibbett was never the same after that escapade at the Philosophy Club. Crope, I think, entered
an arts auction house, and still ffits around with the theatrical set. I see him from time to time at
occasions. We don’t speak.”
“My, you’re disapproving!” She laughed. “Of course being as prurient as the next creature I
always wondered what the Philosophy Club had turned out to be like. You know, in another life I’d
like to see them all again. And Glinda, dear Glinda. And even nasty Avaric. What of him?”
“Avaric I do speak to. He’s most of the year installed in the Margreavate, but he has a house in
Shin. And when in the Emerald City we stay at the same club.”
“Is he still a smug boor?”
“My,you’re disapproving now.”
“I suppose I am.” They ate their dinner. Fiyero waited for her to ask more about his family. But
it was their respective families they were keeping from each other, apparently: his Vinkus wife and
children, her circle of agitators and insurrectionists.
The next time he came, he thought, he must wear a shirt open at the neck, so she could see that
the pattern of blue diamonds on his face continued unbroken down his chest. . . Since she seemed to
like that.
“Surely you don’t spend the entire autumn season in the Emerald City?” she asked one evening
when the cold was drawing in.
“I’ve send word to Sarima that business is keeping me here indefinitely. She doesn’t care. How
could she care? Plucked out of a filthy caravansary and married as a small child to an ArjikI prince?
Her family wasn’t stupid. She’s got food, servants, and the solid stone walls of Kiamo Ko for
defense against the other tribes. She’s going a little fat after her third child. She doesn’t really notice
whether I’m home or not-well, she has five sisters, and they all moved in. I married a harem.”
“No!” Elphaba sounded intrigued and a little embarrassed at the idea.
“You’re right, no, not really. Sarima has proposed once or twice that her younger sisters could
and would happily occupy my energies at nighttime. Once you pass over the Great Kells, the taboo
against such an exercise isn’t as strong as it seems to be in the rest of Oz, so stop looking so
shocked.”
“I can’t help it. Did you do it?”
“Did I ‘do it’?” He was teasing her.
“Did you sleep with your sisters-in-law?”
“No,” he said. “Not out of lofty moral standards, or a lack of interest, either. It’s just that
Sarima is a shrewd wife, and everything in marriage is a campaign. I would have been in her thrall
even more than I am.”
“Such a bad thing?”
“You’re not married, you don’t know: Yes, a bad thing.”
“I am married,” she said, “just not to a man.”
He raised his eyebrows. She put her hands to her face. He’d never seen
her look like that-her words had shocked herself. She had to turn her head away for an instant,
clear her throat, blow her nose. “Oh damn, tears, they burn like fire,” she cried, suddenly in a fury,
and ran for an old blanket to dab her eyes before the salty wetness could run down her cheeks.
She stood bent over like an old woman, one arm on the counter, the blanket falling from her face
to the floor. “Elphie, Elphie,” he said, horrified, and lurched after her, and put his arms around her.
The blanket hung between them, chin to anides, but seemed about to burst into flame itself, or roses,
or a fountain of champagne and incense. Odd how the richest images bloomed in the mind when the

body itself was most alert..
“No,” she cried, “no, no, I’m not a harem, I’m not a woman, I’m not a person, no.” But her arms
wheeled of their own accord, like windmill sails, like those magicked antlers, not to kill him, but to
pin him with love, to mount him against the wall.
Malky, with a rare display of discretion, climbed to the windowsill and looked away from
them.
They conducted their love affair in the room above the abandoned corn exchange as the autumn
weather came lop-leggedly in from the east: now a warm day, now a sunny one, now four days of
cold winds and thin rain.
There were long days in a row when they couldn’t meet. “I have business, I have work, trust me
or I shall disappear on you,” she said. “I shall write to Glinda and ask her to share the spell on how
to go up in a puff of smoke. I am teasing, but I mean it, Fiyero.”
Fijero + Fae he wrote, in the flour that spilled when she rolled out a piecrust. Fae, she had
whispered, as if even to keep it from the cat, was her code name. No one in the cell could know one
another’s real names.
She would not let him see her naked in the light, but since he also was not allowed to visit
during the day this was hardly a problem. She waited for him on the appointed evenings, sitting
naked under the blanket, reading essays on political theory or moral philosophy. “I don’t know that I
understand them, I read them as poetry,” she once admitted. “I like the sound of the words, but I don’t
ever really expect my slow, slanted impression of the world to change by what I read.”
“Is it changing by how you live?” he asked, turning down the light and slippinr out of his
clothes.
“You think all this is new to me,” she said, sighing. “You think I am such a virgin.”
“You didn’t bleed the first time,” he observed. “So what’s to think about?”
“I know what you think,” she said. “But how experienced are you, Lord Sir Fiyero, Arjiki
Prince of Kiamo Ko, Mightiest Stalker of the Thousand Year Grasslands, Chiefest Chieftain in the
Great Kells?”
“I am putty in your hands,” he said, truthfully. “I married a child bride and to preserve my
power I haven’t been unfaithful. Until now. You are not like her,” he said. “You don’t feel like her, it
doesn’t feel the same. You’re more secret.”
“I don’t exist,” she said, “so you’re still not being unfaithful, either.”
“Let’s not be unfaithful right now then,” he said, “I can’t wait,” running his hands along her ribs,
down the tight plane of her stomach. She always brought his hands to her thin, expressive breasts;
she would not be touched below the waist by hands. They moved together, blue diamonds on a green
field.
He didn’t have enough to do during the days. Being the chieftain of the Arjiki people, he knew it
was in their political interest to be tied ineluctably to the commercial hub of the Emerald City. Yet
Aijiki business concerns only required Fiyero to show his face at social engagements, in board
meetings and financial parlors. The rest of the time he wandered about, seeking frescoes of Saint
Glinda and other saints. Elphaba-Fabala-Elphie-Fae would never tell him what she had been doing
in the chapel of Saint Glinda attached to the mauntery in Saint Glinda’s Square.
One day he looked up Avaric and they had lunch. Avaric suggested a girlie show afterward, and
Fiyero begged off. Avaric was opinionated, cynical, corrupt, and as good-looking as ever. There
wasn’t much gossip to bring back to Elphaba.
The wind tore the leaves from the trees. The Gale Force continued to frog-march Animals and
collaborators out of town. Interest rates in the Gillikin banks went soaring up-good for investors, bad
for those who had adjustable rate loans. Foreclosures on a lot of valuable city-centre properties.

Too early, businesses began stringing the green and gold lights
of Lurlinemas, trying to woo cautious and depressed citizens into the shops.
More than anything else he wanted to walk the streets of the Emerald City with Elphaba-there
was no more beautiful place to be in love, especially at dusk as the shop lights went on, golden
against the blue-purple evening sky. He had never been in love before, he now saw. It humbled him.
It scared him. He couldn’t bear it when their forced absence went four or five days.
“Kisses to Irji, Manek, and Nor,” he wrote on the bottom of his weekly letter to Sarima, who
couldn’t write back because, among other things, she had never learned either alphabet. Somehow
her silence seemed a tacit approval of this vow-shattering interlude. He didn’t write kisses to her,
too. He hoped the chocolates would do.
He rolled over, tugging the blanket with him; she tugged it back. The air in the room was so
cold it seemed clammy. Malky endured their thrashing legs in order to stay near them, to receive
warmth, and to give whatever passes for affection in cats.
“My darling Fae,” said Fiyero. “You probably know this, and I’m not about to become a coconspirator at whatever it is you’re working for-reducing library fines or revoking the need for cat
collars or whatever. But I do keep my ears open. The Quadlings are under the thumb of the marching
militia again. At least that’s what they’re saying in the lounge of the club, over newspapers and
pipes. Apparently an army division has gone down into Quadling Country as far as Qhoyre, on some
sort of a slash-and-burn mission. Your father, your brother, and Nessarose-are they still there?”
Elphaba didn’t answer for a while. She seemed to be working out not only what she wanted to
say, but perhaps even what she could remember. Her expression was of puzzlement, even testiness.
She said, “We lived in Qhoyre for a time, when I was about ten. It’s a funny little low town, built on
boggy ground. Half the streets are canals. The roofs are low, the windows are grilled or louvred to
provide privacy and ventilanon, the air is steamy and the flora excessive-huge roundels of palmy
leaf, almost like shallow quilted pillows, making a sound as they beat against each other in the windtirrr tirrr, tirrr tirrr.”
“I don’t know that there’s much of Qhoyre left,” said FIyero carefully. “If the gossip I picked up
is accurate.”
“No, Papa isn’t there now, thank-thank whoever, whatever, thank nothing,” continued Elphaba.
“Unless things have changed. The good people of Qhoyre weren’t very responsive to missionary
efforts. They’d invite Papa and me in, serve us little damp cakelets and lukewarm red mint tea. We’d
all sit on low, mildewing cushions, scaring geckos and spiders into the deeper shadows. Papa would
drone on about the generous nature of the Unnamed God, doing his basic xenophiiac slant. He
pointed to me as proof. I would grin with horrible sweetness and sing a hymn-the only music Papa
approved of. I was miserably shy and ashamed of my color, but Papa had convinced me of the value
of this work. Invariably the gentle citizens of Qhoyre would capitulate out of hospitality. They’d
allow themselves to be led in prayers to the Unnamed God, but you couldn’t say their hearts were in
it. I think I sensed a great deal more-more dishearteningiy than Papa did-how ineffectual we really
were.”
“So where are they now? Papa, Nessarose, and the boy-your brother, what’s his name?”
“Shell, that’s his name. Well, Papa felt his work was farther south in Quadling Country, in the
real outback. We had a series of small cramped homes around Ovvels-the Hovels in Ovvels, we
called them- that dreary, beastly countryside, full of a bloody beauty.”
At his questioning expression she continued. “I mean, fifteen, twenty years ago, Fiyero, the
Emerald City speculators discovered the ruby deposits there. First under the Ozma Regent, then after
the coup, under the Wizard: same ugly business practices. Though under the Ozma Regent the
exploitation did not require murder and brutality. Using elephants, the engineers hauled in gravel,

they dammed up springs, they perfected a complicated system of strip mining under three feet of
brackish groundwater. Papa thought this disarray in their little moist society was a situation readymade for mission work. And he was right. The Quadlings struggled against the Wizard with illargued proclamations, they resorted to totems, but their only military weapons were slingshots. So
they rallied around my father. He converted them, they went into the struggle with the zeal of the
newly chastised. They were dispossessed and disappeared. All with the benefit of unionist grace.”
“My, you’re bitter.”
“I was a tool. My dear father used me-and Nessarose less so, because of her trouble moving
about-he used me as an object lesson. Looking as I did, even singing as I can-they trusted him partly
as a response to the freakiness of me. If the Unnamed God could love me, how much more
responsible it’d be to the unadulterated them.”
“So, my dear, you don’t care where he is, or what happens to him now?”
“How can you say that?” She sat up, steaming. “I love the mad old tunnel-visioned bastard. He
really believed in what he preached. He even thought that a Quadling corpse found floating faceup in
a brackwater pond-provided it had a tattoo of conversion on it somewhere-was better off than a
survivor. He felt he’d written a single ticket to the Other Land assembly of the Unnamed God. I think
he considered it work well done.”
“And you don’t?” Fiyero had a fairly anemic spiritual life; he felt unqualified to voice an
opinion about her father’s vocation.
“Maybe it was work well done,” she said sadly. “How do I know? But not for me. Settlement
by settlement we reaped converts. Settlement by settlement the civil engineering corps came in, to
detonate the village life. There was no outcry throughout Oz proper. Nobody was listening. Who
cared about the Quadlings?”
“But what brought him there in the first place?”
“He and Mama had had a friend, a Quadling, who died in my family home-a Quadling itinerant,
a glassblower.” Elphaba frowned and closed her eyes, and would say no more. Fiyero kissed her
fingernails. He kissed the V between her thumb and forefinger, he sucked on it as if it were a lemon
rind. She slipped backward to allow him greater purchase.
A while later he said, “But Elphie-Fabala-Fae-are you really not worried about your father and
Nessarose, and little himmy-who?”
“My father chases hopeless causes. It gives his failure at life some legitimacy. For a while he
proclaimed himself a prophet of the return of the last, lost tadpole of the Ozma line. That’s over now.
And my brother Shell-he is probably fifteen by now. Look Fiyero, how can I be worried about them
and be worried about the campaign of the season too? I can’t course around Oz-on that broomstick
there, like a storybook witch!I’ve chosen to go underground so that I can’t worry. Besides, I know what will happen to
Nessarose at least. Sooner or later.”
“What?”
“When my great-grandfather finally pops off, she’ll be the next Eminent Thropp.”
“You’re in line, I thought. Aren’t you older?”
“I’m gone, deane, I’m magicked away in a puff of smoke. Forget it. And you know, that’lI be
good for Nessarose. She’ll be a sort of local queen out there in Nest Hardings.”
“She apparently did a course in sorcery, did you know? In Shin?”
“No, I didn’t. Well, bully for her. If she ever comes down off that plinth-the one that has words
written on it along the edges in gold, reading MOST SUPERIOR IN MORAL RECTITUDE-if she
ever allows herself to be the bitch she really is, she’ll be the Bitch of the East. Nanny and the
devoted staff at Coiwen Grounds will prop her up.”

“I thought you were fond of her!”
“Don’t you know affection when you see it?” scoffed Elphaba. “I love Nessie. She’s a pain in
the neck, she’s intolerably righteous, she’s a nasty piece of work. I’m devoted to her.”
“She’ll be the Eminent Thropp.”
“Better she than I,” said Elphaba dryly. “For one thing, she has great taste in shoes.”
One evening through the skylight the full moon fell heavily on Elphaba sleeping. Fiyero had
awakened and gone to take a leak into the chamber pot. Malky was stalking mice on the stairs.
Coming back, Fiyero looked at the form of his lover, more pearly than green tonight. He had brought
her a traditional Vinkus fringed silk scarf-roses on a black background-and he had tied it around her
waist, and from then on it was a costume for lovemaking. Tonight in sleeping she had nudged it up,
and he admired the curve of her flank, the tender fragility of her knee, the bony ankle. There was a
smell of perfume still in the air, and the resiny, animal smell, and the smell of the mystical sea, and
the sweet cloaking smell of hair all riled up by sex. He sat by the side of the bed and looked at her.
Her pubic hair grew, almost more purple than black, in small spangled curls, a different pattern than
Sarima’s. There was an
odd shadow near the groin-for a sleepy moment he wondered if some of his blue diamonds had,
in the heat of sex, been steamed onto her own skin-or was it a scar?
But she woke up just then, and in the moonlight covered herself with a blanket. She smiled at
him drowsily and called him “Yero, my hero,” and that melted his heart.
She could get so angry, though!
“I wouldn’t be surprised if the pork roll you’re devouring, in such perfect mindless affluence, is
cut from a Pig,” she snapped at him once.
‘just because you’ve already eaten, you don’t need to ruin my appetite,” he protested mildly.
Free-living Animals were not much in evidence in his home territory, and the few sentient creatures
he’d known at Shin had, except at the Philosophy Club that night, made little impression. The plight
of the Animals had not much touched him.
“This is why you shouldn’t fall in love, it blinds you. Love is wicked distraction.”
“Now you have put me off my lunch.” He fed the rest of the pork roll to Malky. “What in the
world do you know about wickedness? You’re a bit player in this network of renegades, aren’t you?
You’re a novice.”
“I know this: The wickedness of men is that their power breeds stupidity and blindness,” she
said.
“And of women?”
“Women are weaker, but their weakness is full of cunning and an equally rigid moral certainty.
Since their arena is smaller, their capacity for real damage is less alarming. Though being more
intimate they are the more treacherous.”
“And my capacity for evil?” said Fiyero, feeling implicated and uncomfortable. “And yours?”
“Fiyero’s capacity for evil is in believing too strenuously in a capacity for good.”
“And yours?”
“Mine is in thinking in epigrams.”
“You let yourself off lightly,” he said, suddenly a little annoyed. “Is that what you’re engaged
by your secret network to do? Generate witty epigrams?”
“Oh, there’s big doings afoot,” she said, uncharacteristically. “I won’t be at the center of it, but
I’ll be on the fringes helping out, believe me.”
“What are you talking about? A coup?”
“Never you mind, and you’ll stay blameless. Just as you want to be.” This was nastiness on her
part.

“An assassination? And so what if you do kill some General Butcher? What does that make
you? A saint? A saint of the revolution? Or a martyr if you’re killed in the campaign?”
She wouldn’t answer. She shook her narrow head in irritation, then flung the rosy shawl across
the room as if it infuriated her.
“What if some innocent bystander is killed as you aim for General Pig Butcher?”
“I don’t know or care much about martyrs,” she said. “All that smacks of a higher plan, a
cosmology-something I don’t believe in. If we can’t comprehend the plan at hand, how could a
higher plan make any more sense? But were I to believe in martyrdom, I suppose I’d say you can
only be a martyr if you know what you are dying for, and choose it.”
“Ah, so then there are innocent victims in this trade. Those who don’t choose to die but are in
the line of fire.”
“There are . . . there will be . . . accidents, I guess.”
“Can there be grief, regret, in your exalted circle? Is there any such thing as a mistake? Is there
a concept of tragedy?”
“Fiyero, you disaffected fool, the tragedy is all around us. Worrying about anything smaller is a
distraction. Any casualty of the struggle is their fault, not ours. We don’t embrace violence but we
don’t deny its existence-how can we deny it when its effects are all around us? That kind of denial is
a sin, if anything is-“
“Ah-now I’ve heard the word I never expected to hear you say.”
“Denial? Sin?”
“No. We.”
“I don’t know why-“
“The lone dissenter at Crage Hall turns institutional? A company gal? A team player? Our
former Miss Queen of Solitaire?”
“You misunderstand. There is a campaign but no agents, there is a game but no players. I have
no colleagues. I have no self I never did, in
fact, but that’s beside the point. I am just a muscular twitch in the larger organism.”
“Hah! You the most individual, the most separate, the most real .
“Like everyone else you refer to my looks. And you make fun of them.”
“I adore your looks and I acknowledge them. Fae!”
They parted that day without speaking, and he spent the evening at the betting parlor, losing
money.
The next time he saw her, he brought three green candles and three gold candles and decorated
her flat for Lurlinemas. “I don’t believe in religious feast days,” she said, but relented to admit, “they
are pretty, though.”
“You have no soul,” he teased her.
“You’re right,” she answered soberly. “I didn’t think it showed.”
“You’re only playing word games now.”
“No,” she said, “what proof have I of a soul?”
“How can you have a conscience if you don’t have a soul?” he asked despite himself-he wanted
to keep things light, to get back onto a better footing after their last episode of moral wrestling and
estrangement.
“How can a bird feed its young if it has no consciousness of before and after? A conscience,
Yero my hero, is only consciousness in another dimension, the dimension of time. What you call
conscience I prefer to call instinct. Birds feed their young without understanding why, without
weeping about how all that is born must die, sob sob. I do my work with a similar motivation: the
movement in the gut toward food, fairness, and safety. I am a pack animal wheeling with the herd,

that’s all. I’m a forgettable leaf on a tree.”
“Since your work is terrorism, that’s the most extreme argument for crime I’ve ever heard.
You’re eschewing all personal responsibility. It’s as bad as those who sacrifice their personal will
into the gloomy morasses of the unknowable will of some unnameable god. If you suppress the idea
of personhood then you suppress the notion of individual culpability.”
“What is worse, Fiyero? Suppressing the idea of personhood or suppressing, through torture
and incarceration and starvation, real living persons? Look: Would you worry about saving one
precious sentimental por
trait in a museum of fine arts when the city around you is on fire and real people are burning to
death? Keep some proportion in all this!”
“But even some innocent bystander-say an annoying society dame-is a real person, not a
portrait. Your metaphor is distracting and belittling, it’s a blind excuse for crime.”
“A society dame has chosen to parade herself as a living portrait. She must be treated as such.
It’s her due. That denial of it, that’syour evil, to go back to the other day. I say you save the innocent
bystander if you can, even if she’s a society dame, or he’s a captain of industry thriving mightily on
all these repressive moves-but not, not, not at the expense of other, realer people. And if you can’t
save them, you can’t. Everything costs.”
“I don’t believe in this concept of ‘real’ or ‘realer’ people.”
“You don’t?” She smiled, not nicely. “When I do disappear again, deane, I’ll surely be less real
than I am now.” She made to simulate sex against him; he turned his head, surprised at the vigor of
his aversion.
Later that night, when they had made up, she suffered a racking paroxysm and painful sweats.
She would not let him touch her. “You should go away, I’m not worthy of you,” she moaned, and
some time later, when she was calmer, she murmured before sleeping again, “I love you so much,
Fiyero, you just don’t understand: Being born with a talent or an inclination for goodness is the
aberration.”
She was right. He didn’t understand. He wiped her brow with a dry towel and kept close to her.
There was frost on the skylight, and they slept beneath their winter coats to keep warm.
One brisk afternoon he sent off a propitiatory package of bright wooden toys for the children
and a jeweled torque for Sarima. The pack train was going around the Great Kells via the northern
route. It wouldn’t deliver Lurlinemas presents to Kiamo Ko until well into the spring, but he could
pretend to have sent them earlier. If the snows held off, he would be home by then, restless and
chafing in the tall narrow rooms of the mountain stronghold, but maybe he would get the credit for
thoughtfulness. And perhaps deserved, why not? To be sure, Sanima would be in her winter
doldrums (as distinct from her spring moods, her summer ennui, and
her congenital autumn condition). A torque eventually would cheer her up, at least a little.
He stopped for a coffee in a cafe in a neighborhood just enough off the beaten track to be both
bohemian and pricey. The management apologized:
The winter garden, usually heated with braziers and brazen with expensive forced flowers, had
been the site of an explosion the night before. “The neighborhood is troubled; who’d have thought
it?” said the manager, touching Fiyero on the elbow. “Our Glorious Wizard was to have eradicated
civil unrest: wasn’t that the whole point of curfews and containment laws?”
Fiyero was not inclined to comment, and the manager took his silence for agreement. “I’ve
moved a few tables into my private parlor up the stairs, if you don’t mind roughing it amidst my
family memorabilia,” he said, leading the way. “Finding good Munchkinlander help to repair the
damage is getting harder, too. The Munchkinlander tiktok touch, there’s nothing like it. But a lot of
our friends in the service sector have ‘gone back to their eastern farms. Scared of violence against

them-well, so many of them are so small, don’t you think they seem to provoke it?- they’re all
cowards.” He interrupted himself to say, “I can tell you have no Munchkinlander relatives or I
wouldn’t comment this way.”
“My wife is from Nest Hardings,” said Fiyero, lying unconvincingly, but the point was made.
“I recommend the cherry chocolate frappe today, fresh and delicious,” said the manager,
retreating into repentant formality, and pulling out a chair at a table near high old windows. Fiyero
sat and looked out. One fretted shutter had warped and couldn’t fold back against the outer wall as
designed, but there was still enough of a view. Rooflines, ornamental chimney pots, the odd high
window box stuffed with dark winter pansies, and pigeons swooping and scissoring like lords of the
sky.
The manager was of that peculiar stock; after so many generations in the Emerald City, it
seemed a separate ethnic strand. The paintings of his family showed the bright gimlet hazel eyes, and
refined receding hairlines on men and women alike (and plucked into the scalps of children, too, in
the fashion of the Emerald City upwardly yearning middle class). At the sight of simpering boys in
pink satin with frizzy-headed lapdogs, and girlettes in womanish dark rouge and plunging necklines
(revealing their innocent lack of breasts), Fiyero felt the sudden longing, again, for
his own cold and distant children. Though bruised by their particular family life-and who
wasn’t?-in his memory Irji, Manek, and Nor managed more integrity than these hothouse scions of a
family on the make.
But that was cruel, and he was responding to artistic convention, not to the actual children. He
turned his gaze out the window when the order came, to avoid hideous art, to avoid the other people
in the salon.
Having coffee in the winter garden below usually provided a view of vine-covered brick walls,
shrubs, and the occasional marble statue of some improbably beautiful and vulnerably naked
stripling. However, from a flight up, one could see over the wall, into an interior mews area. One
part was a stables, another a neighborhood toilet, apparently; and just within the range of his vision
was the wall broken by the explosion. Some sort of twisted, thorny wire netting had been erected
across the opening, which led into a schoolyard.
As he watched, one of the doors of the adjacent school was pushed open, and a small crowd
emerged, shaking and stretching into the sunlight. There seemed to be-Fiyero peered-a couple of
elderly Quadling women and some adolescent male Quadlings, straplings with early mustaches
making a bluish-colored shadow against their fine rose-rust skin. Five, six, seven Quadlings-and a
couple of stout men who might have been part Gillikinese, it was hard to tell-and a family of bears.
No- Bears. Smallish Red Bears, a mother and father and a toddler.
The little Bear went unerringly to some balls and hoops under the stairs. The Quadlings made a
circle and began to sing and dance. The old ones, with arthritic steps, joined their hands with the
teenagers and moved in a widdershins pattern, in and out, as if making a clock face that reversed the
clockwise movement of time. The stocky Gillikinese men shared a cigarette and gazed out the wiry
barrier across the break in the wall. The Red Bears were more dispirited. The male sat on the
wooden edge of a sandlot, tubbing his eyes and combing the fur below his chin. The female moved
back and forth, kicking at the ball just often enough to keep the cub occupied, then stroking the bowed
head of her mate.
Fiyero sipped his drink and inched forward. If there were, what, twelve prisoners, and only a
wire fence between them and freedom, why didn’t they rush it? \Vhy were they separated into their
racial and species groups?
After ten minutes the doors opened again and a Gale Forcer came
out, trim and-yes, Fiyero had to admit it at last-terrifyIng. Terrifying in the brick red uniform

with the green boots, and the emerald cross that quartered the breast of the shirt, one vertical strap
from groin to high starched collar, the other strap from armpit to armpit across the pectorals. He was
only a youth whose curly hair was so blond as to look nearly white in the winter sun. He stood with
legs apart on the step of the school’s verandah.
Though Fiyero couldn’t hear a thing through the closed window, the soldier apparently gave a
command. The Bears stiffened and the cub began to wail and clutch the ball to itself. The Gillikinese
men came and stood quiescently ready. The Quadlings ignored the order and kept on with their
dance. They swung their hips, and they held their arms at shoulder height, moving their hands in a
semaphoric message, though what it meant Fiyero could only guess. He had never seen a Quadling
before.
The Gale Forcer raised his voice. He had a truncheon in a thong ioop at his waist. The cub hid
behind the father, and the mother could be seen to growl.
Work together, Fiyero found himself thinking, hardly aware he could have such a thought. Work
as a team-there are twelve of you and only one of him. Is it your differences from one another that
keep you docile? Or are there relatives inside who will be tortured if you make a break for freedom?
It was all speculation; Fiyero couldn’t tell the dynamics of the situation, but he was riveted. He
realized his hand was open, palm up against the glass of the window. Below, because the Bears had
not stood to join the lineup, the soldier raised his cudgel and it came down on the skull of the cub.
Fiyero’s body jerked, he spilled his drink and the cup broke, porcelain shards on the buttery
herringbone-laid oak flooring.
The manager appeared from behind a green baize door and tutted, and twitched the drapes
closed, but not before Fiyero had seen one last thing. Recoiling as if he had never hunted and killed
in the Thousand Year Grasslands, he averted his eyes and they wheeled upward, where he glimpsed
the pale blond coins of faces-two or three dozen schoolchildren in the upper windows of the school,
staring down with fascination and open mouths at the scene in their playing field.
“They have no concern for neighbors who have a business to run,
bills to pay, and loved ones to feed,” snapped the manager. “You don’t need to see those antics
as you enjoy your coffee, sir.”
“The disruption in your winter garden,” said Fiyero. “That was someone trying to break down
your wall into that yard, and get them out alive.”
“Don’t even suggest it,” shot the manager in a low voice. “There are more ears in this room
than yours and mine. How do I know who was up to what, or why? I’m a private citizen and I mind
my own business.”
Fiyero didn’t take a replacement cup of cherry chocolate. There were racking cries from the
mother Bear, and then a silence in the world outside the heavy damask drapes. Was it an accident I
saw that, Fiyero wondered, looking at the manager with new eyes. Otis it just that the world unwraps
itself to you, again and again, as soon as you are ready to see it anew?
He wanted to tell Elphie what he had seen, but he held back for reasons he couldn’t name. In
some way, in the balance of their affections, he sensed she needed an identity separate from his.
Were he to become a convert to her cause, she might drift away. He did not dare to risk it. But the
vision of the battered Bear cub haunted him. He held Elphie the tighter, trying to communicate a
deeper passion without speaking it.
He noticed, too, that when she was agitated she was the more liberal in her lovemaking. He
began to be able to tell when she was going to say “Not till next week.” She seemed more
abandoned, more salacious, perhaps as a cleansing exercise before disappearing for a few days. One
morning, as he was stealing some of the cat’s milk for his coffee, she rubbed some oil on her skin,
wincing with sensitivity, and said over her shoulder of soft green marble, “A fortnight, my dear. My

pet, as my father used to say. I need a fortnight of privacy now.”
He had a sudden pang, a premonition, that she was going to leave him. It was a way for her to
get two weeks’ head start. “No!” he said. “That’s not on, Fae-Fae. It’s not all right, it’s too long.”
“We need it.” She expanded: “Not you and I, I mean the other we. Obviously I can’t tell you
what we’re about, but the last plans for the autumn campaign are falling into place. There’s going to
be an episode- I can’t say more-and I must be available to the network at all times.”
“A coup?” he said. “An assassination? A bomb? A kidnapping? \Vhat?Just the nature of it, not
the specifics, what?”
“Not only can I not tell you,” she said, “I don’t even know. I’ll be told only my small part, and
I’ll do it. I only know it’s a complicated maneuver with a lot of interlocking pieces.”
“Are you the dart?” he said. “Are you the knife? The fuse?”
She said (though he wasn’t convinced): “My deane, my poppet, I am too green to walk into a
public place and do something bad. It’s all too expected. Security guards watch me like owls on a
mouse. My very presence provokes alarm and heightened vigilance. No, no, the part I’ll play will be
a handmaiden’s part, a little assistance in the shadows.”
“Don’t do it,” he said.
“You’re selfish,” she said, “and you’re a coward. I love you, my sweet, but your protests about
this are wrongheaded. You just want to preserve my insignificant life, you don’t even have a moral
feeling about whether I’m doing right or wrong. Not that I want you to, not that I care what you think
about it. But I only observe, your objections are of the weakest sort. Now this isn’t something to be
argued. Two weeks from tonight, come back.”
“Will the-the action-be completed by then? Who decides?”
“I don’t know what it is yet, and I don’t even know who decides, so don’t ask me.”
“Fae-” Suddenly he didn’t like her code name anymore. “Elphaba. Do you really not know who
is pulling the strings that make you move? How do you know you’re not being manipulated by the
Wizard?”
“You are a novice at this, for all your status as a tribal prince!” she said. “Why shouldn’t I
know if I was being a pawn of the Wizard? I could tell when I was being manipulated by that
harridan, Madame Morrible. I learned something about prevarication and straight talking back at
Crage Hall. Give me the credit for having spent some years at this, Fiyero.”
“You can’t tell me for sure who is or isn’t the boss.”
“Papa didn’t know the name of his Unnamed God,” she said, rising and rubbing oil on her
stomach and between her legs, but modestly turning her back to him. “It never is the who, is it? It’s
always the why.”
“How do you hear? How do they tell you what to do?”
“Look, you know I can’t say.”
“I know you can.”
She turned. “Oil my breasts, will you.” “I’m not that stupidly male, Elphaba.”
“Yes you are”-she laughed, but lovingly-“come on.”
It was daylight, the wind roared and even shook the floorboards. The cold sky above the glass
was a rare pinkish blue. She dropped her shyness like a nightgown, and in the liquid glare of sunlight
on old boards she held up her hands-as if, in the terror of the upcoming skirmish, she had at last
understood that she was beautiful. In her way.
The collapse of her reticence frightened him more than anything else.
He took some coconut oil and warmed it between his palms, and slid his hands like leathery
velvet animals on her small, responding breasts. The nipples stood, the color flushed. He was
already fully dressed, but recklessly he pressed himself against her mildly resisting form. One hand

slid down her back; she arched against him, moaning. But perhaps, this time, not from need?
Still his hand moved down onto her buttocks, felt between her cheeks, beyond, felt the place
one muscle pulled in crookedly, endearingly, felt the very faintest etching of hair beginning its
crosshatch shadows, its swirl toward vortex. He worked his intelligent hand, reading the signs of her
resistance.
“I have four companions,” she said suddenly, wrenching away in a motion soft enough not to
disengage but to discourage. “Oh heart, I have four comrades; they don’t know who our cell leader
is, it’s all done in the dark, with a masking spell to shadow the voice and distort the features. If I
knew more, the Gale Force could catch me and torture it out of me, don’t you see?”
“What is your object?” he breathed, kissing her, loosening his trousers again, as if this were the
first time, his tongue tracing the twisting funnel of her ear.
“Kill the Wizard,” she answered, looping her legs around him. “I am not the arrowhead, I am
not the dart, I am just the shaft, the quiver-” She cupped more oil in her hand and as they slid and fell
into the light, she made him bright and anguished with oil, took him deeper in than ever before.
“Even after all this time, you could be an agent for the Palace,” she said later.
“I’m not,” he said. “I’m good.”
A little snow fell one week, then some more the next. The feast of Lurlinemas drew nearer. The
unionist chapels, having appropriated and transformed the most visible parts of the old pagan
beliefs, hung themselves shamelessly in green and gold, set out green candles and golden gongs and
greenberry wreaths and gilded fruit, Along Merchant Row, shops outdid themselves (and the
churches) in decor, with displays of fashionable clothes, and useless and expensive trinkets. In
display windows, papier-machr figures evoked the good Fairy Queen Lurline in her winged chariot,
and her assistant, the minor fairy Preenella, who strewed gift-wrapped delights from her capacious
magic basket.
He asked himself, again and again, if he was in love with Elphaba.
He also asked himself why he was so late coming to this question, after two months of a
passionate affair; and if he knew what the words even meant; and if it mattered.
He chose more gifts for the kids and for sulky Sarima, that well-fed malcontent, that monster.
He missed her a little; his feelings for Elphaba seemed not to vie with those for Sarima, but to
complement them. No two women could be more unlike, Flphaba demonstrated the proud
independence of Arjiki mountain women that Sarima, married so young, had never developed. And
Elphie wasn’t just a different (not to say novel) provincial type-she seemed an advance on the
gender, she seemed a different species sometimes. He caught himself with a mammoth erection just
remembering that last time, and he had to hide himself behind some ladies’ scarves in a shop until it
subsided.
He bought three, four, six scarves for Sarima, who didn’t wear scarves. He bought six scarves
for Fiphaba, who did.
The shop girl, a dull Munchkinlander midget who had to stand on a chair to reach the till, said
over his shoulder, ‘just in a minute, ma’am.” He turned to make room at the counter for the other
customer.
“But Master Fiyero!” cried Glinda.
“Miss Glinda,” he said, flabbergasted. “What a surprise.”
“A dozen scarves,” she said. “Look, Crope, look who’s here!”
And there was Crope, a little jowly though he couldn’t be twenty-five yet, could he?-looking
guiltily up from a display of feathery, plumy things.
“We must have tea,” said Glinda, “we must. Come now. Pay the
nice little lady and off we fly.” In her voluminous skirts she rustled like a corps of ballerinas.

He hadn’t remembered her quite so giddy; maybe this was married life. He slid a glance at
Crope, who was rolling his eyes behind her back.
‘just you put this on Sir Chuifrey’s account, and this, and this,” Glinda said, mounding things on
the counter, “and have them sent along to our rooms in the Florinthwaite Club. I’ll need them for
dining so have someone run over with them right now if you would. How dear. So kind. Ta ta. Boys,
come along.”
She gripped Fiyero with a pinching hand and steered him away; Crope followed like a lapdog.
The Florinthwaite Club was only a street or two over and they could easily have carried the
purchases back themselves. Glinda capered and clattered down the grand staircase into the Oak
Parlor, making enough noise so that every female resident looked up in a rewarding sort of
disapproval.
“Now, you, Crope, there, so you can be Mother and pour when we’ve ordered, and dear Fiyero,
you here, right next to me, that is if you’re not too married.”
They ordered tea; Glinda got used to him a bit and began to calm down.
“But really, who would have thought it?” she said, picking up a biscuit and putting it down
again, about eight times in a row. “We were the great and the good at Shin, really. Look at you,
Fiyero-you’re a prince, aren’t you? Do we call you Your Highness? I never could. And you’re still
married to that little child?”
“She’s grown up now, and we have a family,” Fiyero told her warily. “Three children.”
“And she’s here. I must meet her.”
“No, she’s back at our winter home in the Great Kells.”
“Then you’re having an affair,” said Glinda, “because you look so happy. Who with? Anyone I
know?”
“I’m just happy to see you;” he said; and in fact he was. She looked wonderful. She had filled
out some. That wraithlike beauty had bloomed but not coarsened. She was more woman than waif,
and more wife than woman. Her hair was cut short in a boyish style, very becoming, and there was a
tiaralike thing in her curls. “And now you’re a sorceress.”
“Oh hardiy,” she said. “Can I even get that damned serving girl to hurry up with the scones and
jam? I can not. Yes, I can sign a hundred greeting cards for the holiday season at one go. But it’s a
very minor talent, I tell you. Sorcery is vastly overrated in the popular press. Otherwise, why
wouldn’t the Wizard just magick the hell out of his adversaries? No, I’m content to try to be a good
partner for my Chuifrey. He’s at the exchange today, doing financial thingies. Oh do you know who
else is in town? It’s too rich, Crope tell him.”
Crope, surprised to be given an opening, choked on his mouthful of tea. Glinda rushed in.
“Nessarose! Can you believe it? She’s at the family home over there in Lower Mennipin Street-an
address that’s come up quite a lot in the past decade, I might add. We saw her where, Crope, where?
It was the Coffee Emporium-“
“It was the Ice Garden-“
“No, I remember, it was the Spangletown Cabaret! Fiyero do you know, we went to see that old
Sillipede, do you remember? No you don’t, I can see it in your face. She was the singer who was
performing at the Oz Festival of Song and Sentiment the day our Glorious Wizard arrived out of the
sky in a balloon and orchestrated that coup! She’s making yet another of her innumerable comeback
tours. She’s a bit camp now but so what, it was gales of fun. And there at a better table than we had,
I might tell you, was Nessie! She was with her grandfather, or is it the great-grandfather? The
Eminent Thropp? He must be eleventy-hundredy years old by now. I was shocked to see her until I
realized she went merely to provide him an escort. She didn’t think much of the music-she scowled
and prayed all through the entr’acte. And the Nanny was there too. Who would’ve imagined it,

Fiyero-you’re a prince, and Nessarose just about installed as the next Eminent Thropp, and Avaric,
of course, the Margreave of Tenmeadows, and humble little me-eee married to Sir Chuffrey, holder
of the most useless title and the biggest stock portfolio in the Pertha Hills?” Glinda almost stopped
for breath, but lunged on kindly, “And Crope, of course, dear Crope. Crope, tell Fiyero all about
yourself, he’s dying to know, I can see it.”
Actually Fiyero was interested, if only for a rest from the staccato chatter.
“He’s shy,” Glinda pushed on, “shy shy shy, always was.” Fiyero
and Crope exchanged glances and tried to keep their mouths from twitching. “He’s got this so
avant-garde little palace of a loft apartment on the top floor of a doctor’s surgery, could you
imagine? Stunning views, the best views in the Emerald City, and at this time of year! He dabbles a
bit in painting, don’t you dear? Painting, a little musical operetta set design here and there. When we
were young we thought the world revolved around Shin. You know there’s real theatre here now, the
Wizard has made this a much more cosmopolitan city, don’t you think?”
“It’s good to see you, Fiyero,” said Crope, “say something about yourself, fast, before it’s too
late.”
“You cad, you kid me mercilessiy,” sang Glinda. “I’ll tell him about your little affair with-well
never mind. I’m not that mean.”
“There’s nothing to say,” Fiyero said, feeling even more taciturn and Vinkus than he had when
he first arrived in Shin. “I like my life, I lead my clan when they need it, which isn’t often. My
children are healthy. My wife is-well, I don’t know..
“Fertile,” supplied Glinda.
“Yes.” He grinned. “She’s fertile and I love her, and I’m not going to stay much longer as I’m
meeting someone for a business conference across town.”
“We must meet,” said Glinda, suddenly plaintive, suddenly looking lonely. “Oh Fiyero, we’re
not old yet, but we’re old enough to be old friends already, aren’t we? Look, I’ve gushed on like a
debutante who forgot to splash on her Eau d’Demure. I’m sorry. It’s just that that was such a
wonderful time, even in its strangeness and sadness-and life isn’t the same now. It’s wonderful, but it
isn’t the same.”
“I know,” he said, “but I don’t think I can meet you again. There’s so little time, and I have to go
back to Kiamo Ko. I’ve been away since the late summer.”
“Look, we’re all here, me and Chuifrey, Crope, Nessarose, you-is Avaric around, we could get
him? We could get together, we could have a quiet dinner together in our rooms upstairs. I promise
not to be so giddy. Please, Fiyero, please, Your Highness. It would do me such an honor.” She
cocked her head and put a single finger to her chin, elegantly, and he could tell she was struggling
through the language of her class to say something real.
“If I think I can, I’ll let you know, but please, you mustn’t count on it,” he said. “There’ll be
other times. I’m not usually in town so late in the season-this is an anomaly. My children are waitinghave you children, Glinda?”
“Chuifrey is dry as two baked walnuts,” said Glinda, making Crope choke on his tea again.
“Before you go-I can see you’re getting ready to dash-dear, dear Fiyero-what do you hear from
Elphaba?”
But he was prepared for this, and had readied his face to be blank, and he only said, “Now
that’s a name I don’t hear every day. Did she ever turn up? Surely Nessarose must have said.”
“Nessarose says if her sister ever does turn up she’ll spit in her face,” Glinda remarked, “so we
must all pray that Nessarose never loses her faith, for that would mean the evaporation of such
tolerance and kindness. I think she would kill Elphaba. Nessa was abandoned, rejected, left to look
after her crazy father, her grandfather-thingy, that brother, that nurse, that house, the staff-and you

can’t even say single-handedly, as she doesn’t have any hands!”
“I thought I saw Elphaba once,” said Crope.
“Oh?” said Fiyero and Glinda together, and Glinda continued, “You never told me that, Crope.”
“I wasn’t sure,” he said. “I was on the trolley that runs along the reflecting pool by the Palace. It
was raining-some years ago now-and I saw a figure struggling with a big umbrella. I thought she was
about to be blown away. A gust of wind blew the umbrella inside out and the face, a greenish face
which is why I noticed, ducked down to avoid the splash of rainwater-you remember how Elphaba
hated getting wet.”
“She was allergic to water,” Glinda opined. “I never knew how she kept herself so clean, and I
her roommate.”
“Oil, I think,” said Fiyero. They both looked at him. “That is, in the Vinkus,” he stammered,
“the elderly rub oil into their skin instead of water-I’ve always assumed that’s what Elphie did. I
don’t know. Glinda, if I were to meet up with you again, what’s a good day?”
She rooted in her reticule for a diary. Crope took the opportunity to lean forward and say to
Fiyero, “It really is good to see you, you know.”
“You too,” said Fiyero, surprised that he meant it. “If you ever get
out into the central Kells, come stay at Kiamo Ko with us.Just send word ahead, as we’re only
there for half a year at a time.”
“That’s just your speed, Crope, the wild beasts of the untamed Vinkus,” said Glinda. “I think the
fashion possibilities, all those leather thongs and fringe and such, they might interest you, but I can’t
see you as Mister Mountain Boy.”
“No, probably not,” agreed Crope. “Unless it affords fabulous cafes every four or five blocks, I
don’t think a landscape quite developed enough for human habitation.”
Fiyero shook hands with Crope and then, remembering the rumors about poor Tibbett’s
deterioration, kissed him; he threw his arms around Glinda and hugged her hard. She laced her arm
through his and walked him to the door.
“Do let me shake off Crope and have you back, all to myself,” she said in a low voice, her
patter evaporating into seriousness. “I can’t tell you, dear Fiyero. The past seems both more
mysterious and more understandable with you right here before me. I feel there are things I could yet
learn. I don’t want to wallow, dear boy, never that! But we go way back.” She held his hand between
hers. “Something’s going on in your life. I’m not as dumb as I act. Something good and bad at the
same time. Maybe I can help.”
“You were always sweet,” he said, and motioned to the doorman to hail a hansom cab. “How I
regret that I won’t meet Sir Chuffrey.”
He moved out the doorway, across the marble entrance pavement, and turned to tip his hat at
her. In the doors (the doormen held them open to enhance his parting view) she was a calm, resigned
woman, neither transparent nor ineffectual-even, it might have been said, a woman full of grace. “If
you should see her,” said Glinda lightly, “tell her I miss her still.”
He didn’t see Glinda again. He didn’t call at the Florinthwaite Club. He didn’t stroll past the
Thropp family house in Lower Mennipin Street (though he was sorely tempted). He didn’t stop a
scalper to try to get one of the tickets to Sillipede’s triumphant fourth annual comeback tour. He
found himself in the Chapel of Saint Glinda in Saint Glinda Square, from which he could sometimes
hear the cloistered maunts next door chanting and susurrating like a swarm of bees.
When the two weeks had passed at last, and the city was worked up to a froth over Lurlinemas,
he went to see Elphaba, half-expecting she would have vanished.
But there she was, stern and loving and in the midst of making a vegetable pie for him. Her
precious Malky was putting his feet in the flour and making paw prints all over the room. They

talked awkwardly until Malky upset the bowl of vegetable stock, and that made them both laugh.
He didn’t tell her about Glinda. How could he? Elphaba had worked so hard to keep them all at
bay, and now she was engaged in the major campaign of her life, the thing she had been working
toward for five years. He did not approve of anarchy (well, he knew he was in lazy doubt about
everything; doubt was much more energy efficient than conviction). But even after seeing the Bear
cub struck down, he had to keep an even, cautious relationship with the Power on the throne-for the
sake of his tribe.
Also, Fiyero didn’t want to make Elphie’s life harder than it was. And his selfish need to be
comfortable with her surmounted his need to gossip. So he didn’t tell her Nessarose and Nanny were
in town either, or had been. (For all he knew, he rationalized silently, they had already moved on.)
“I wonder,” she said that night, as the stars peered through the crazy frost pattern on the skylight,
“I wonder if you should get out of town before Lurlinemas Eve.”
“Is all hell going to break loose?”
“I told you, I don’t know the whole picture; I can’t know; I shouldn’t know. But maybe some
hell will break loose. Maybe it would be best for you to go.”
“I’m not going and you can’t make me.”
“I’ve been taking correspondence courses in sorcery on the side, I’ll go puff and turn you into
stone.”
“You mean you’ll make me hard? I’m already hard.”
“Stop. Stop.”
“Oh you wicked woman, you have bewitched me again, look, it has a mind of its own-“
“Fiyero stop. Stop. Now look, I mean it. I want to know where you’re going to be on
Lurlinemas Eve. Just so I can be sure you’re not going to get hurt. Tell me.”
“You mean we won’t be together?”
“It’s a work night for me,’ she said grimly. “I’ll see you the next day.”
“I’ll wait here for you.”
“No you won’t. I think we’ve covered our tracks pretty well, but there’s still a chance even at
this late date that somebody could come here to intercept me. No-you stay in your club and take a
bath. Take a nice long cold bath. Got it? Don’t even go out. They say it might be snowy by then
anyway.”
“It’s Lurlinemas Eve! I’m not going to spend the holiday in a bathtub all alone.”
“Well, hire some company, see ff1 care.”
“As if you don’t.”
‘just stay away from anything social, I mean theatre or crowds, or even restaurants, please, will
you promise me that?”
“If you could be more specific I could be more careful.”
“You could be most careful if you left town completely.”
“You could be most careful if you told me-“
“Give over with that, cut it out. I don’t think I even want to know where you are, come to think
of it. Ijust want you to be safe. Will you be safe? Will you stay inside, away from drunken pagan
celebrations?”
“Can I go to chapel and pray for you?”
“No.” She looked so fierce that he didn’t even tease her about it again.
“Why should I keep myself so safe?” he asked her, but he was almost asking himself. What is
there in my life worth preserving? With a good wife back there in the mountains, serviceable as an
old spoon, dry in the heart from having been scared of marriage since she was six? With three
children so shy of their father, the Prince of the Ailikis, that they will hardly come near him? With a

careworn clan moving here, moving there, going through the same disputes, herding the same herds,
praying the same prayers, as they have done for five hundred years? And me, with a shallow and
undirected mind, no artfulness in word or habit, no especial kindness toward the world? What is
there that makes my life worth preserving?
“I love you,” said Elphaba.
“So that’s that then, and that’s it,” he answered her, and himself. “And I love you. So I promise
to be careful.”
Careful of us both, he thought.
So he stalked her again. Love makes hunters of us all. She had swathed herself in long dark
skirts, like some sort of a religious woman, and tucked up her hair inside a tall wide-brimmed hat
with a crown like a cone. There was a dark scarf, purple and gold, wound around her neck, and
pulled over her mouth, though she would need more than a scarf to mask that lovely prow of a nose.
She wore elegant, tight-fitting gloves, a nicer type of accessory than she usually went in for, though
he feared it was to allow for nimbler control of her hands. Her feet were lost in big, steel-toed boots
like the kind worn by miners in the Glikkus.
If you didn’t know she was green, it would be hard to tell-in this dark afternoon, in this raking
skittle of snow.
She didn’t look behind her; perhaps she didn’t care if she was being followed. Her circuit took
her around some of the major squares of the city. She ducked in for a minute to the chapel of Saint
Glinda next to the mauntery, the one where he had first seen her. Perhaps she was getting last-minute
instructions, but she didn’t try to give him (or anyone else) the slip. She emerged in a minute or two.
Or perhaps-perish the thought-she was actually praying for guidance and strength?
She crossed the Law Courts Bridge, she wandered along the Ozma Embankment and cut
diagonally through the abandoned rose gardens of the Royal Mall. The snow pestered her; she kept
twining her cape the more tightly around; the silhouette of her thin, dark-stockinged legs in those huge
comical boots showed up against the snowy blankness of the Oz Deer Park (now of course bereft of
Deer and deer). She marched, head tucked down, past the cenotaphs and obelisks and memorial
tablets to the Magnfficent Dead of this escapade or that. The decades-Fiyero thought, in love with
her or at least so frightened for her that he could mistake it for love-the decades looked on and didn’t
notice her passing. They stared from their fixed mounts across at each other and didn’t see revolution
striding between them, on her way to destiny.
But the Wizard must not be her aim. She must have told the truth in saying that she was too
untried, and too obvious, to be selected as the Wizard’s assassin. She must be involved in a
diversionary tactic, or in taking out a possible successor or high-level ally. For tonight the Wizard
would be opening the antiroyalist, revisionist Exhibit of Struggle and Virtue at the People’s
Academy of Art and Mechanics near the Palace. Yet at the top of the Shin Road Elphaba struck out
sideways, away from the Palace district, cutting through the small, fashionable district of Goldhaven.
The homes of the filthy rich were guarded by mercenaries, and she clopped past them on the
pavements, past the stableboys out sweeping the snow off the pavement with their brooms. She did
not look up or down or back over her shoulder. Fiyero guessed he was the more ostentatious figure,
striding in his opera cape in the snow a hundred paces behind.
At the edge of Goidhaven was perched a small bluestone jewel of a theatre, the Lady’s
Mystique. In the shallow but elegant square before it, white lights and gold and green spangles hung
in profusion, looped from streetlight to streetlight. Some holiday oratorio or other was scheduled- he
could only read SOLD OUT on the board in front-and the doors weren’t yet opened. The crowd was
gathering, some vendors sold hot chocolate in tall ceramic glasses, and a crowd of self-approving
youngsters amused themselves and bothered some elderly people by singing a parody of an old

unionist hymn of the season. The snow came down on all, on the lights, the theatre, the crowds; it
landed in the hot chocolate, it was churned to mush and ice on the bricks.
Bravely, foolishly-without decision or choice, it felt like-Fiyero climbed the steps of a nearby
private library, to keep an eye on Elphaba, who lost herself in the crowd. Was there to be a murder
in the theatre? Was there to be arson, the innocent sybarites roasted like chestnuts? Was it a single
mark, an appointed victim, or was it mayhem and disaster, the more, the worse, the better?
He didn’t know if he was there to prevent what she was about to do, or to save whomever he
could from the catastrophe, or to tend anyone hurt accidentally, or even maybe just to witness it, so
he could know more about her. And love her or not love her, but know which of the two it was.
She was circulating through the crowd, as if trying to locate someone. He believed, incredibly,
that she didn’t know he was there-was she so intent on finding the right victim, and he didn’t fill the
bill? Could she not feel her lover in the same open-air square with her as the wind moved the
curtains of snow?
A phalanx of Gale Forcers appeared from an alley between the theatre and a school next door.
They took up their places before the bank of glass doors in front. hiphaba mounted the steps of an
ancient wool market, a kind of stone gazebo. Fiyero saw that she had something under her cloak.
Explosives? Some magic implement?
Did she have colleagues in the square? Were they lining themselves up one with another? The
crowd kept getting thicker, as the hour for the oratorio drew near. Inside the glass doors, house
management was busy lining up stanchions and stringing velvet ropes to promote a genteel entry into
the hall. Nobody pushed and shoved into a public space like the very rich, Fiyero knew.
A carriage came around the corner of a building on the far side of the square. It couldn’t come
right up to the doors of the theatre, as the crowds were too dense, but it proceeded as far as it was
able. Sensing the presence of someone with authority, the crowd drew a little still. Could this be the
elusive Wizard, on an unannounced visit? A coachman in a teck-fur headpiece flung the door open,
and reached his hand in to assist the passenger in alighting.
Fiyero held his breath; Elphaba stiffened into petrified wood. This was the target.
Out into the snowy street, in a tidal wave of black silk and silver spangles, swept a huge
woman; she was magisterial and august, she was Madame Morrible, no other; even Fiyero
recognized her, having met her only once.
He saw that Elphaba knew that this was the one she must kill; she had known this; in an instant
all was dead clear. If she was caught and captured and tried, her motivation couldn’t be more
wonderful-she was merely a mad student from Madame Morrible’s own Crage Hall, she carried a
grudge, she never forgot. It was too perfect.
But could Madame Morrible be involved in intrigue with the Wizard? Or was this just a
diversion, to take the mind of the authorities away from some more urgent target?
Elphaba’s cape twitched; her hand went up and down inside it, as if priming something.
Madame Morrible was growling a greeting to the crowd, which, while not necessarily knowing who
she was, appreciated the spectacle if not the bulk of her arrival.
The Head of Crage Hall walked four steps toward the theatre, on the arm of a tiktok minion, and
Elphaba leaned a little forward from under the wool market. Her chin was now sharply jutting out
from the scarf, her nose aiming forward; she looked as if she could snip Madame Morrible into
shreds, just using the serrated blades of her natural features. Her hands continued to figure out things
beneath the cape.
But then were thrown open the front doors of the building Madame Morrible was walking pastnot the theatre, but the adjacent school, Madame Teastane’s Female Seminary. Out the doors
swarmed a cluster, a little upper-class mob of schoolgirls. What were they doing in school on a

Lurlinemas Eve? Fiyero caught Elphaba looking wildly surprised. The girls were six or seven, small
creamy lumps of uncurdled femininity, spooned into furry muffs and tucked into furry scarves and
tipped into boots with furry edges. They were laughing and singing, raucous and rough as the elite
adults they would become, and in their midst was a pantomime player, someone being the Fairy
Preenella. It was a man, as the convention had it, a man done up in silly clownlike makeup, and mock
bouncing bosom, and a wig and extravagant skirts, and a straw hat, and a huge basket with trinkets
and treasures spilling out. “Oh la, socie-tec,” he fluted at Madame Morrible, “even Fairy Preenella
can have a present for the Lucky Pedestrian.”
For a moment Fiyero thought the man in drag was going to pull out a knife and kill Madame
Morrible right in front of the children. But no, espionage was organized but not that organized-this
was a real accident, a disruption. They hadn’t figured on there being a school occasion this evening,
nor on a screaming flock of schoolgirls greedily tugging at an actor in skirts and falsetto.
Fiyero turned back to look at Elphaba. Her face struggled with disbelief. The children were in
the way of whatever she was supposed to do. They were a small unruly mob, chasing around the
Head, teasing Preenella, leaping up at him/her, grabbing for presents. The children were the
accidental context-noisy, innocent daughters of tycoons, despots, and butcher generals.
He could see Elphaba working, he could see her hands fighting with each other, to do it
anyway, to keep from doing it-whatever it was.
Madame Momble pushed on, like a huge float in a Remembrance
Day parade, and the doors of the theatre opened for her. She passed grandly into safety.
Outside, the children danced and sang in the snow, the crowd surged this way and that. Elphaba
crumpled and sank back against a pillar, shivering with self-loathing so violently that Fiyero could
see it from fifty yards away. He began to push toward her, devil come what may, but by the time he
reached the steps she had, for the first and only time, managed to lose him.
The audience filed into the theatre. The children shrieked their song in the street, awash with
greed and joy. The carriage that had brought Madame Morrible around was able to draw up in front
of the theatre and start its long wait for her to come out again. Fiyero paused, unsure, in case there
was a backup plan, in case Elphaba had something else up her sleeve, in case the theatre exploded.
Then he began to worry that, in the few minutes of losing sight of her, Elphaba had been
rounded up by the Gale Force. Could they have whisked her out of sight that fast? What should he do
if she became one of the disappeared?
At a clip, he headed back across town. Mercifully he found a waiting cab, and he had the cab
drive him directly to the street of warehouses adjacent to the military garrison in the city’s ninth
district.
In a state of profound agitation he arrived back at Elphaba’s little eyrie atop the corn exchange.
As he climbed the stairs, his bowels turned suddenly to water, and it was only with effort he
managed to make it to the chamber pot. His insides slopped noisily, wetly out, and he held his
perspiring face in his hands. The cat was perched atop the wardrobe, glaring down at him. Voided,
washed down, and at least loosely done up again, he tried to coax Malky with a bowl of milk. She
would have none of it.
He found a couple of dried crackers, and ate them miserably, and then pulled on the chain to
open the skylight, to help air the room. A couple of plops of snow fell in and sat there not melting, it
was that cold in the damn place. He went to build up a fire, pulled open the iron door of the stove.
The fire caught, then flared, and the shadows detached themselves and moved as shadows will,
but these shadows moved fast, across the room, at him before he could reaister what they were.
Excent that there
were three, or four, or five, and they were wearing black clothes, and black char on their faces,

and their heads were wrapped in colored scarves Like the ones he had bought for Elphaba, for
Sarima. On the shoulder of One he saw the glint of a gilded epaulet: a senior member of the Gale
Force. There was a club and it beat down on him, like the kick of a horse, Like the falling limb of a
tree hit by lightning. There must be pain, but he was too surprised to notice. That must be his blood,
squirting a ruby stain on the white cat, making it flinch. He saw its eyes open, twin golden green
moons, befitting of the season, and the cat then scarpered through the open skylight and was lost in
the snowy night.
The youngest maunt was obliged to answer the convent door if the bell sounded during
mealtime. In fact she was clearing away the remains of pumpkin soup and rye brisks, the other
maunts already wafting, in a cerebral mood, toward their cloister chapel upstairs. She hesitated
before deciding to answer the bell-in another three minutes she too would have been losing herself in
devotions, and the bell would have gone unheeded. She had rather get the dishes to soak, frankly. But
the seasonal cheer bullied her into charity.
She opened the huge door to find a figure crouched like a monkey in the dark corner of the stone
porch. Beyond, snow was wrinkling the facade of the adjacent Church of Saint Glinda, making it
look like a reflection in water, only right way up. The streets were empty and a noise of choirs came
filtering out of the candle-lit church.
“What is it?” said the novice, remembering then to add, “Good Lurlinemas, my friend.”
She decided, once she saw the blood on the odd green wrists, and the darting look in the eyes,
that holiday decency required her to drag the creature inside. But she could hear her sister maunts
assembling in their private chapel, and the mother maunt beginning to sing a prelude in her silvery
contralto. This was the novice’s first big liturgical event as a member of this community, and she
didn’t want to miss a moment of it.
“Come with me, dolly,” she said, and the creature-a young woman a year or two older than she
was-managed to straighten up enough to walk, or hobble, like a cripple, like a person so
malnourished that their extensors cannot flex and their limbs look as if they are about to snap.
The novice stopped in a washroom to rinse the blood off the wrists, and to make certain that it
was indeed splattered mess from the beheading of some hen for a holiday supper, and not a sad
attempt at suicide. But the stranger recoiled from the sight of water, and looked so deranged and
unhappy that the novice stopped. She used a dry towel instead.
The maunts were beginning antiphonal chants upstairs! How maddening! The novice took the
path of least resistance. She dragged the forlorn thing down toward the winter salon, where the old
retired biddies lived out their lives in a haze of amnesia and the discreetly placed clumps of
marginium plants, whose sweet miasma helped mask the odors of the old and incontinent. The crones
lived in a time of their own, they couldn’t be carted upstairs to the sacred chapel anyway.
“Look, I’ll sit you down here,” she said to the woman. “I don’t know if you need sanctuary or
food or a bath or forgiveness, whatever. But you can stop here, warm and dry and safe and quiet. I’ll
come back to you after midnight. It’s the feast day, you see. It’s the vigil service. Watch and wait,
and hope.”
She pushed the hunted, haunted woman into a soft chair, and found a blanket. Most of the crones
were snoring away, their heads nodding on their breastbones, dribbling softly onto bibs ornamented
with green and gold berries and leaves. A few were telling their beads. The courtyard, open in
summer, was now welled in with glass panels for the winter, so it looked like a square fish tank in
an aquarium; snow falling in it always made them peaceful.
“Look, you can see the snow, white as the grace of the Unnamed God,” said the novice,
remembering her pastoral requirements. “Think on that, and rest, and sleep. Here’s a pillow. Here’s
a stool for your feet. Upstairs we’ll be singing and praising the Unnamed God. I’ll pray for you.”

“Don’t-” said the green ghostly guest, then slumped her head against the pillow.
“It’s my pleasure to,” said the novice, a bit aggressively, and fled, just in time to catch the
processional hymn.
For a while the winter salon was still. It was like a fishbowl into which a new acquisition has
been dropped. The snow moved as if done by a machine, gently and mesmerizingly, with a soft churr.
The blossoms of the mareinium plants closed a bit in the strengthening cold of the room. Oil lamps
issued their funereal crepe ribbons into the air. On the other side of the garden-hardly visible through
the snow and the two windows-a decrepit haunt, with a more precise grasp of the calendar than her
sisters, began to hum a saucy old pagan hymn to Lurline.
Up to the shivering figure of the newcomer came one of the elders, inching forward in a
wheeled chair. She leaned forward and sniffed. From a cloak of plaid blanket, blue and ivory, she
pawed her old hands along the armrests. She reached out and touched Elphaba’s hand.
“Well, the poor dolly is sick, the poor dolly is tired,” said the ancient thing. Her hands felt, as
the novice’s had done, for open wounds on the wrists. Nothing. “Though intact, the poor dolly is in
pain,” she said, as if approving. A dome of near-balding scalp came into view under the hood of the
blanket. “The poor dolly is faint, the poor dolly is faltering,” she went on. She rocked a bit and
pressed Elphaba’s hands between her own, as if to warm them, but it was doubtful that her anemic
and incompetent old circulatory system could heat a stranger when it could scarcely heat herself.
Still she kept on. “The poor poppet is failure itself,” she murmured. “Happy holidays to one and all.
Come my dear, lay your breast on old Mother’s bosom. Old Mother Maunt will set things right.” She
couldn’t quite pull Elphaba out of her position of dreamless, sleepless grief. She could only keep
Elphaba’s hands tightly clutched within her own, as a sepal sockets the furls of young petal. “Come,
my precious and all will be well. Rest in the bosom of mad Mother Yackle. Mother Yackle will see
you home.”

Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West

Book 4 - In the Vinkus
On the day the seven-year maunt was to leave, Sister Bursar took the huge iron key from her
bosom and unlocked the store chamber, and said, “Come in.” She pulled from the press three black
shifts, six camisoles, gloves, and a shawl. She also handed over the broom. Finally, for emergencies,
a basket of simples-herbs and roots, tinctures, rues, salves and balms.
There was paper, too, though not much: a dozen pages or so, in different shapes and
thicknesses. Paper was in ever shorter supply in all of Oz. “Make it last, make it important,” advised
Sister Bursar. “You’re a bright one, for all your sulks and silences.” She found a pen. A pfenix
feather, known for the endurance and strength of the quill. Three pots of black ink, sealed under
knobby wristholds of wax.
Oatsie Manglehand was waiting in the ambulatory with the old Superior Maunt. The convent
was paying a decent penny for this service, and Oatsie needed the fees. But she didn’t like the look
of the sullen maunt that Sister Bursar ushered in. “This is your passenger,” said the Superior Maunt.
“Her name is Sister Saint Aelphaba. She’s spent many years in solitary life and in nursing. The habit
of gossip is lost. But it’s time for her to move on, and move on she will. You’ll find her no trouble.”
Oatsie looked the passenger over and said, “The Grasstrail Train doesn’t promise the survival
of its party, Mother. I’ve led two dozen trips these past ten years or so, and there have been more
casualties than I like to admit.”
“She leaves of her own free will,” said the Superior Maunt. “Should she wish to return at any
point, we would take her in. She is one of us.”
She didn’t look one of anything to Oatsie, neither flesh nor fowl,
neither idiot nor intellectual. Sister Saint Aelphaba just stared at the floor. Though she seemed
to be about thirty, she had a sallow, adolescent look about her.
“And there’s the luggage-you can manage it?” The Superior Maunt pointed to the small heap of
supplies in the immaculate forecourt in front of the mauntery. Then she turned to the departing maunt.
“Sweet child of the Unnamed God,” said the Superior Maunt, “you go from us to conduct an exercise
in expiation. You feel there is a penalty to pay before you may find peace. The unquestioning silence
of the cloister is no longer what you need. You are returning to yourselfi So we send you from us
with our love and with our expectations of your success. Godspeed, my good sister.”
The passenger kept her eyes trained on the ground and did not answer.
The Superior Maunt sighed. “We must be off to our devotions.” She peeled a few notes from a
roll of money kept in the recesses of her veils, and handed them over to Oatsie Manglehand. “This
should see you through, and more besides.”
It was a healthy amount. Oatsie stood to earn a lot from escorting this taciturn woman through
the Kells-more than from the whole rest of her party combined. “You are too good, Mother Maunt,”
she said. She took the cash with her strong hand, and made a gesture of deference with her limp one.
“No one is too good,” said the Superior Maunt, but nicely, and retired with surprising speed
behind the cloister doors. Sister Bursar said, “You’re on your own now, Sister Elphie, and may all
the stars smile you on your way!” and she disappeared as well. Oatsie went to load the luggage and
supplies in the wagon. There was a small, chunky ragamuffin boy asleep behind the trunk. “Off with
you,” said Oatsie, but the boy muttered, “I’m to go too, that’s what they told me.” Vv’hen Sister Saint
Aelphaba neither confirmed nor denied this plan, Oatsie began to understand why the payment to take
the green maunt away had been more than generous.
The Cloister of Saint Glinda was located in the Shale Shallows, twelve miles southwest of the
Emerald City. It was an outpost mauntery, under

the aegis of the one in town. Sister Saint Aelphaba had spent two years in town and five years
here, according to the Mother Maunt. “You want to be called Sister still, now that you’re sprung
from that holy prison?” asked Oatsie as she clucked the reins and urged the packhorses on.
“Elphie is fine,” said the passenger.
“And the boy, what’s he called?”
Elphie shrugged.
The coach met the rest of the caravan a few miles on. There were four wagons in all, and fifteen
travelers. Elphie and the boy were the last to join. Oatsie Manglehand outlined the proposed route:
south along the edge of Kellswater, west through Kumbricia’s Pass, northwest through the Thousand
Year Grasslands, stopping at Kiamo Ko, and then wintering a bit farther northwest. The Vinkus was
uncivilized land, Oatsie told them, and there were tribal groups to be wary of: the Yunamata, the
Scrow, the Arjiki. And there were animals. And spirits. They would need to stick together. They
would need to trust one another.
Elphie showed no sign of listening. She fiddled with the pfenix feather and drew patterns in the
soil between her feet, coiling shapes like dragons writhing or smoke rising. The boy squatted eight
or ten feet away, wary and shuttered. He seemed to be her page, for he managed her bags and
attended her needs, but they did not look at each other, or speak. Oatsie found it strange in the
extreme, and hoped it didn’t augur ill.
The Grasstrail Train set off at sunset, and made only a few miles before its first camp at a
streambed. The party-mostly Gillikinese- chattered in nervous amazement at their courage, to go so
far afield from the safety of central Oz! All for different reasons: for business, for family needs, to
pay a debt, to kill an enemy. The Vinkus was a frontier, and the Winkies a beknighted, bloodthirsty
folk who knew little about indoor plumbing or the rules of etiquette so the party regaled itself in
song. Oatsie took part for a short time, but she knew there was hardly one among them who wouldn’t
prefer to stay where they were and avoid the depths of the Vinkus altogether. Except perhaps that
Elphie, who was keeping pretty much to herself.
They left the rich edge of Gillikin behind. The Virikus began with a mesh of pebbles spread on
brown wet soil. At night the Lizard Star pointed the
direction: south, south along the edge of the Great Kells, to the dangerous gap of Kumbricia’s
Pass. Pines and black starsaps stood up like teeth on every embankment. By day they were
welcoming, sometimes giving shade. By night they towered, and harbored snatchowls and bats.
Elphie was often awake at night. Thought was returning to her, perhaps expanding under the
fierce openness, where the birds cried in falling voices, and the meteors stitched omens into the sky.
Sometimes she tried to write with her pfeni.x feather; sometimes she sat and thought words out, and
didn’t commit them to paper.
Life outside the cloister seemed to cloud up with such particularity-the shape of her seven years
past was already being crowded out. All that undifferentiated time, washing terra-cotta floors
without dipping her hands in the bucket-it took hours to do a single room, but no floor was ever
cleaner. Making wine, taking in the sick, working in the infirmary wing, which had reminded her
briefly of Crage Hall. The benefit of a uniform was that one need not struggle to be unique-how many
uniquenesses could the Unnamed God or nature create? One could sink selflessly into the daily
pattern, one could find one’s way without groping. The little changes-the red bird landing on the
windowsill, and that was spring-the leaves to rake from the terrace, and that was fall-they were
enough. Three years of absolute silence, two years of whisper, and then, moved up (and outward) by
the decision of the Superior Maunt, two years on the ward for incurables.
There, for nine months-thought Elphie under the stars, picturing it to herself as if telling
someone else-she tended the dying, and those too clumsy to die. She grew to see dying as a pattern,

beautiful in its way. A human form is like a leaf, it dies in a set piece unless something interferes:
first this, then that, then this. She might have gone on as a nurse forever, arranging wrists in a
pleasing pattern above starched bedsheets, reading the nonsense words of scripture that seemed to
help so. She could manage the dying.
Then, a year ago, pale invalid Tibbett was carted to the Home for the Incurables. He wasn’t too
far gone to recognize her even behind her veil and silences. Weak, unable to shit or piss without
help, his skin falling in rags and parchment, he was better at life than she was. He selfishly required
that she be an individual, and he addressed her by her
name. He joked, he remembered stories, he criticized old friends for abandoning him, he
noticed the differences in how she moved from day to day, how she thought. He reminded her that
she did think. Under the scrutiny of his tired frame she was re-created, against her will, as an
individual. Or nearly.
At last he died, and the Superior Maunt had said that it was time for her to go and atone for her
mistakes, though not even the Superior Maunt knew what they were. ‘When that was done?-well, she
was still a young woman, she could raise a family. Take her broom and remember:
obedience and mystery.
“You can’t sleep,” said Oatsie one night as Elphie sat under the stars.
But though her thoughts were rich and complicated, her words were poor, and she merely
grunted. Oatsie made a few jokes at which Elphie tried to smile, but Oatsie laughed enough for both
of them. Big, full laughs. It made Elphie tired.
“Isn’t that cook a piece of work?” said Oatsie, and told some episode that seemed pointless,
and she chortled at her own story. Elphie tried to enjoy, tried to grin, but above her the stars grew
thicker, more like glittering fishspawn than salt; they turned on their stalks with a cursing, grinding
sound, if only she could hear it. She couldn’t hear it; Oatsie was too coarse and loud.
There was much to hate in this world, and too much to love.
Before long they came to the edge of Kellswater, a murderous slice of water lying as if cleft
from the side of a thundercloud. It was all gray, no lights on it. “That,” said Oatsie, “is why the
horses don’t drink from it, nor travelers; that’s why it was never tapped in aqueducts and run to the
Emerald City. It’s dead water. And you thought you’d seen it all.” Still, the travelers were
impressed. A lavender heaviness arose on its western edge-the first hint of the Great Kells, the
mountains that separated the Vinkus from the rest of Oz. From here the mountains appeared as thin as
gas.
Oatsie demonstrated the use of the fog charm in the event of an attack by a band of Yunamata
hunters. “Are we going to be attacked?” asked the boy who seemed to be Elphie’s page. “I’ll get ‘em
dead before no one knows what’s on.” The fear rose up from him and caught on in
the others. “We usually do well,” said Oatsie, “we just need to be prepared. They can be
friends. If we are friends.”
The caravan straggled by day, four wagons keeping their distance, accompanied by nine horses,
two cows, a bull, a heifer, and various chickens without much personality. The cook had a dog
named Killyjoy who seemed to Elphie a Makejoy instead, a panting, sniffy thing. Some people
thought for a time he might actually be a Dog, in hiding, but they gave up that idea. “Hah,” Elphie
said to the others, “have you spoken to Animals so seldom that you can’t remember the difference
anymore?” No, he was just a dog, but a most glorious doggy dog, full of rages and exaggerated
devotions. Killyjoy was a mountain breed, part Linster collie, part Lenx terrier, and maybe part
wolf. His nose went up like a butter curl, in gray-black ridges and ribs. He could not be kept from
hunting but he did not catch much either. By night, when the wagons squared off together, the cooking
fire within, the animals just nearby, without, and the singing began at last, Killyjoy hid under the

wagon.
Oatsie heard the boy tell the dog his name. “I’m Liir,” said the boy.
“You can be my dog, sort of.” She had to smile. The fat child was not good at making friends,
and a lonely child should have a dog.
Kdlswater slipped back, out of sight. Some felt safer away from it. Almost hourly the Great
Kells rose and thickened, the color now like the brown rind of a butterdew melon. Still the track
meandered along the valley, the Vinkus River on its right, the mountains beyond it. Oatsie knew
several places to ford, but they weren’t clearly marked. ‘While they searched, Killyjoy caught a
valley grite at last. He bled and whined, and was treated for poison. Liir let him ride in his arms,
which made Elphie faintly jealous. She was almost amused to note in herself such a turgid, oldfashioned feeling as jealousy.
The cook was angry that Killyjoy preferred someone else’s company more than his-he shook his
ladle overhead as if summoning the wrath of angel chefs among the stars. Elphie thought of him as a
butcher cook, as he seemed to have no scruples about shooting rabbits and eating them. “How do you
know they’re not Rabbits?” she said, and she wouldn’t touch a bite.
“Quiet, you, or I’ll cook that little boy instead,” he answered.
She tried to raise with Oatsie the notion of firing the cook, but Oatsie would not listen. “We’re
coming in to Kumbricia’s Pass,” she said, “my mind is on other matters.”
They couldn’t help but feel the unsettling eroticism of the landscape. From the eastern approach,
the Kumbricia Pass looked like a woman lying on her back, her legs spread apart, welcoming them.
Up in the slopes, the pine boughs shaded the sun, the wild pears tangled their twisted branches
together as if wrestling. A sudden dampness, a new private climate-the bark ran wet, the air sank
heavily against the skin like half-laundered toweling. Once inside the forest, the travelers could not
see the hills. Everything smelled of ferns and fiddle-greens. And on the shores of a small lake stood
a dead tree. It harbored a community of bees, at their work of chamber music and honey.
“I want to take them with us,” said Elphie. “I’ll talk to them and see if they’ll come.”
There had been bees in the kitchen garden at Crage Hall, and again at the Cloister of Saint
Glinda in the Shale Shallows. Elphie was entranced by them. But Liir was terrified, and the cook
threatened to disappear and leave the group traumatized by an inability to do a really topnotch
bechamel sauce in the wilderness. Discussion was waged. An old man in the party, heading
westward to die because of some midnight vision, ventured as to how a little honey would improve
the tasteless sparrowleaf tea. A Glikkun mail-order bride agreed. Oatsie, of sentimental enthusiasms
when least expected, voted for honey. So Elphie climbed the tree and talked to the bees, and they
came along in a swarm, but most travelers stayed in the other wagons, suddenly scared of every fleck
of dust that flitted against the skin.
They sent out a request, using drums and mist, to attract the attention of a hired rafiqi, for
caravans were not allowed to move through the lands of different Vinkus tribes without a guide to
negotiate permissions and fees. Bored one evening, and responding to the gloom, the travelers fell to
discussing the legend of the Kumbric Witch. Who comes first, the Fairy Queen Lurline or the
Kumbric Witch?
Igo, the sick old man, quoted the Oziad, and reminded them all of how creation worked: the
Dragon of Time created the sun and the moon,
and Lurline cursed them and said that their children wouldn’t know their own parents, and then
the Kumbric Witch came along and the flood, the battle, the spilling of evil in the world.
Oatsie Manglehand disagreed. She said, “You old fools, the Oziad is just a frilly, romantic
poem of older, harsher legends. What lives in folk memory is truer than how some artsy poet says it.
In folk memory evil always predates good.”

“Can this be true?” asked Igo, with interest.
“Surely there is the handful of nursery marchen that start, ‘Once in the middle of a forest lived
an old witch’ or ‘The devil was out walking one day and met a child,” said Oatsie, who was
showing that she had some education as well as grit. “To the grim poor there need be no pour quoi
tale about where evil arises; it just arises; it always is. One never learns how the witch became
wicked, or whether that was the right choice for her-is it ever the right choice? Does the devil ever
struggle to be good again, or if so is he not a devil? It is at the very least a question of definitions.”
“It certainly is true that tales of the Kumbric Witch abound,” agreed Igo. “Every other witch is
just a shadow, a daughter, a sister, a decadent descendant; the Kumbric Witch is the model further
back than which it seems impossible to go.”
Elphie remembered the ambiguous scroll painting of the Kumbric Witch-was it she?-found in
the library of Three Queens, that summer long ago: standing in shiny shoes, straddling a continent,
nursing or choking a beast.
“I don’t believe in the Kumbric Witch, even in Kumbricia’s Pass,” boasted the cook.
“You don’t believe in Rabbits either,” snarled Elphie, suddenly annoyed. “The question is,
does the Kumbric Witch believe in you?”
“Temper,” sang out Oatsie, and turned it into a singalong song. Elphie stamped away. This was
too much like her childhood, discussions with her father and Nessarose about where evil begins. As
if one could ever know! Her father used to orchestrate proofs about evil as a way of persuading his
flock to convert. Elphie had come to think, back in Shiz, that as women wore cologne, men wore
proofs: to secure their own sense of themselves, and thus to be attractive. But surely evil was beyond
proof, just as the Kumbric Witch was beyond the grasp of knowable history?
The rafiqi arrived, a thin, balding man with battle scars. There might be trouble from the
Yunamata this year, he told them. “The caravan comes after a season of dirty forays by cavalry from
the Emerald City. Winkie roundup,” he complained. It wasn’t clear if he was talking about a local
argument over a drunken slight to a Vinkus maiden or about a slave trade and resettlement camps.
The camp was broken, the lake left behind, and the silent forest continued for a half a day.
Sunlight speared through the canopy from time to time, but it was a thin, egg yolk light, and seemed
always to be off to the side, never spotlighting down on the path ahead. It was eerie, as if Kumbricia
herself were moving along beside them, hidden, unbidden, passing from tree to tree, sliding behind
rocks, waiting in shadowy depths, watching and listening. The ailing old man wailed nasally, and
prayed to emerge from this mystery wood before he died, or his spirit might never find its way out.
The boy wept like a girl. The cook wrung the neck of a chicken.
Even the bees stopped humming.
In the middle of the night the cook disappeared. There was consternation among all except
Elphie, who didn’t care. Was it a kidnapping, or a sleepwalking episode, or a suicide? Were the
angry Yunamata near, and watching? Was it Kumbricia herself taking revenge on them for discussing
her so glibly? There were many opinions, and the breakfast eggs were runny and inedible.
Killyjoy did not notice the cook’s disappearance. He snuggled, grinning in his coma-sleep,
closer to Liir.
The bees went into some sort of mysterious hibernation inside the joint of tree trunk brought
along to make them happy. Killyjoy, still smarting from grite poison, slept twenty-two hours a day.
The travelers, afraid of being overheard, stopped talking altogether.
Toward the evening the pines at last began to thin, and the forest to shift to stag-head oak, which
with its broader branches let in more of the sky-a pasty yellow sky, but at last a sky-and then there
was a cliff edge. They had climbed higher than anyone had quite realized; beneath and
beyond stretched the rest of Kumbricia’s Pass, a journey of four or five days. Beyond that was

the beginning of the Thousand Year Grasslands.
No one was sorry for the light and room that the sky afforded. Even Elphie felt her heart lift,
unexpectedly.
In the middle of the night the Yunamata arrived. They brought gifts of dried fruit and sang tribal
songs, and made those who would dance get up and dance. The travelers were more terrified of their
hospitality than of the attack that they had expected.
As Elphie thought about it, the Yunamata seemed soft, compliant folk, only as fearful and
fearless as schoolgirls-at least that was all they showed. They were cavorting, opinionated; they
reminded her of the Quadlings with whom she had grown up. Perhaps ethnically they were distant
cousins. Long lashes. Narrow elbows. Babylike supple wrists. Oblong heads and thin concentrated
lips-even with their foreign tongue they made her feel at home.
The Yunamata left in the morning, complaining rudely about the runniness of the breakfast eggs.
The rafiqi said that the Yunamata would make no further trouble. Even he seemed disappointed, as if
his employment hadn’t been required.
There was no word about the cook. The Yunamata didn’t seem to know anything about him.
As the caravan continued its descent, the sky opened up again, brisk and autumnal, wide as
remorse. From thcrc to thcrc!-the eye could hardly take it in. The plain below, compared to the
mountains, seemed level as a lake. The wind made strokes across it, as if spelling things in a
language of curls and stripes. No wildlife was visible from this distance, though there were tribal
fires here and there. Kumbricia’s Pass was left behind, or nearly.
Then a Yunamata messenger came on swift leathery feet, arriving from the Pass behind them, to
share the news that a body had been found at the base of a cliff. Perhaps it was the cook; it was
thought to be a man, but the surface of the corpse was so swollen with lesions that the particulars
were lost. “It was the bees,” said someone, full of rage.
“Oh, was it?” came Elphie’s calm voice. “They’ve been asleep for so long. Wouldn’t there
have been screams if they’d attacked a man in the
middle of the night? Did the bees sting his throat first, to swell his vocal cords shut? Very
talented bees, those.”
“It was the bees,” was the mutter, and the implication was clear. You too.
“Oh, I forgot the size of the human imagination,” Elphie said meanly. “How very large it is,
after all.”
But she wasn’t upset, not really. For Killyjoy was back to himself, at last, and the bees woke up
too. Perhaps the high altitudes at the top of the Kumbricia Pass had given them such sleep. Elphie
began to prefer their company to the rest of the travelers. As they woke up, coming down from the
heights, she felt herself more and more awake, too.
The rafiqi pointed out on the horizon several mounding coils of smoke. At first the travelers
guessed they were windstorms, but Oatsie soothed them and alarmed them: It was evening fires for a
large encampment. S crow. It was autumn hunting season, though nothing had been seen of any game
bigger than a hare or a grass fox (its brush a wild swipe of bronze on melting golden meadow, its
feet in black stockings like a serving maid’s). Killyjoy was ecstatic with the possibilities of
encounter; he could hardly bear to rest at night. Even in his dreams he twitched with the hunt.
The travelers feared the Scrow more than they had the Yunamata. The rafiqi did not say much to
allay their fears. He was more tentative than it had first seemed; perhaps the job of negotiating
among suspicious peoples required caution. Liir idolized him hopelessly, after only a few days of
travel. Elphie thought: Such silly things, children-and so embarrassing-because they keep changing
themselves out of shame, out of a need to be loved or something. While animals are born who they
are, accept it, and that is that. They live with greater peace than people do.

She felt in herself a jolt of pleasurable expectation over the thought of approaching the Scrow.
Along with so much else, she had forgotten what pleasurable expectation was. As night fell,
everyone seemed more alert, out of fear and excitement. The skies throbbed with turquoise, even at
midnight. Starlight and comet tails burned the tips of endless grass below into a hammered silver.
Like thousands of tapers in the chapel, just blown out but still glowing.
If one could drown in the grass, thought Elphie, it might be the best way to die.
It was noon when the caravan pulled up to the edge of the Scrow camp. A committee of Scrow
had ridden to their domestic margin, where the sand-colored tents petered out into untrampled grassmen and women alike sat on horseback, about seven or eight of them, in blue ribbons and ivory
bangles. Also, obviously senior, was a huge slab of an old woman carried in a palanquin of some
sort, its frame all hung round with tambours and clinking amulets and gauzy veils. She let the rafiqi
and the tribal paladins trade compliments or insults. After a while she grunted a direction and her
curtains were withdrawn so she could see. She had an overhung lip, so large that it doubled back on
itself like an upside-down spout on a pitcher. Her eyes were ringed with kohl. On her shoulders sat
two dyspeptic-looking crows. Their feet were shackled in gold links and attached to loops in her
ornamental collar, into which the old woman had dribbled traces of the fruit she had been eating as
she waited. Her shoulders were speckled with crow droppings.
“The Princess Nastoya,” said the rafiqi at last.
She was the filthiest, least-educated princess anyone had ever seen, yet she had some dignity;
even the most ardent democrat among the travelers genuflected. She laughed raucously. Then she
bade her bearers lug her away to someplace less tedious.
The Scrow camp was arranged in concentric circles, with the Princess’s tent in the middle,
prettied up with extensions of faded striped baldaquins on all sides. It was a little airy palace in
silks and cotton muslin. Her advisors and concubine-husbands seemed to live in the nearest circle
(and a scrawny lot the husbands were, thought Elphie, but perhaps they were chosen for timidity and
scrawniness, to make her seem ever the larger). Beyond the Princess’s settlement ranged four
hundred tents, which meant maybe a thousand people altogether. A thousand humans, with their
poached-salmon skin, their moistly protruding eyes (but sensitive, in lowered gazes, to avoid being
met), their handsome generous noses, and big buttocks, and wide rolling hips, men and women alike.
Most of the caravan travelers stayed glued to the doors of their wag. ons, imagining crime just
beyond the nearest tent. But Elphie found it impossible to keep still, with all this newness beckoning.
When Elphie walked, there were gasps, and the adults shyly retreated out of her path. But only ten
minutes had passed before there were sixty children in a noisy crowd, following behind, running
ahead, like a cloud of midges.
The rafiqi advised caution, advised return to the camp; but childhood in the Quadling badlands
had made Elphaba not only bold, but curious. There were more ways to live than the ones given by
one’s superiors.
After the evening meal, a delegation of erect old Scrow dignitaries approached the Grasstrail
Train and entered into a lengthy palaver with the rafiqi. In the end, the rafiqi translated the message:
a small band was invited-requested-(ordered?)-to the Scrow shrine. It would take an hour by camel.
For her sin of skin color, presumably, or possibly for having had the nerve to take a solitary stroll
through the Scrow tent city, Elphie was told to join Oatsie, the rafiqi, Igo for his venerable age, and
one of the financial adventurers-named Pinchweed, or maybe that was just a nasty nickname.
By the light of sallowwood torches, the camels, in glittering caparisons, lurched and lumbered
on a worn track. It was like going up and down a staircase at the same time. Elphie sat above the
grass, a vantage point over the great ffickering surface. Although the ocean was only an idea sprung
out of mythology, she could almost see where it came from-there were small grasshawks launching

themselves like fish leaping out of the spume, nipping at the fireflies, pocketing them, then falling
back in a dry splash. Bats passed, making a guttering, sputtering sound that ended in an extinguishing
swoop. The plain itself seemed to bring forth night color: now a heliotrope, now a bronzy green,
now a dun color skeined through with red and silver. The moon rose, an opalescent goddess tipping
light from her harsh maternal scimitar. Nothing more need have happened; it seemed enough to
Elphaba to find herself capable of such a weird ecstatic response to soft color and safe space. But
no, on-on.
Eventually Elphie noticed a plantation of trees, carefully tended in this devastating openness.
First a stand of scrub spruce, contorted by the winds into gnarled figures of split bark and hissing
needles-and the pagan odor of sap. Beyond, a rise of higher hedges, then, yet higher trees.
It was the circular pattern of the Scrow encampment again. The party passed into it in silence,
as through a maze, along curving corridors of whispering brush, moving from outer to inner circles
lit by oil lamps hammered to carven posts.
Within, at the center, was the Princess Nastoya girded in a native costume of leather and grass
made all the more effective by a length of striped purple and white toweling she must have bargained
from some traveler or other. She stood, distracted and breathing heavily, leaning on stout walking
sticks; around her, sarsen stones like gapped teeth resembled a stone cage through which she could
hardly pass, given her bulk.
The guests joined the hosts in eating, drinking, and smoking on a pipe with a bowl carved like a
crow’s head. Crows ranged all around on the tops of the sarsens, twenty, thirty, forty? Elphie’s head
spun, the moon rose, the plain at night, invisible from the secret garden of the green maze, wheeled
about like a child’s top. She could almost hear the spinning. The Scrow elders chanted in a drone.
When the drone died out, the Princess Nastoya raised her head.
The huge wattles of old flesh beneath her small chin wobbled. Her toweling fell to the ground.
She was naked and old and strong; what had seemed like boredom was revealed as patience,
memory, control. She shook the very hair off her head and it uncoiled down her back and
disappeared. Her feet moved massively, as if seeking the best purchase, like columns, like pillars of
stone. She dropped her arms forward and her back was a dome; still her head was up, her eyes the
brighter, her nose working mightily; she was an Elephant.
An Elephant goddess, Elphie thought, her mind recoiling in terror and delight, but the Princess
Nastoya said, “No.” She spoke through the rafiqi still; he had obviously seen this before, though with
the alcohol he stuttered and had to search for words.
One by one she asked the intentions of the travelers.
“Money and commerce,” said Pinchweed, shocked into honesty:
money and commerce and pillage and plunder at whatever cost.
“A place to die where I can rest, and my spirit go abroad,” ventured Igo.
“Safety and movement, out of harm’s way,” said Oatsie spunkily, by which it was clear she
meant: out of men’s way.
The rafiqi indicated that Elphie’s own answer was still needed.
In the presence of such an Animal, Elphie could not stay aloof. So she spoke it as best as she
could. “To retire from the world after making sure of the safety of the survivors of my lover. To face
his widow, Sarima, in guilt and responsibility, and then to remove myself from the darkening
world.”
The Elephant told the others, except the rafiqi, to leave.
The Elephant raised her trunk and sniffed the wind. Her rheumy old eyes blinked slowly and her
ears moved back and forth, raking the air for nuance. She pissed hugely in a steaming flow, with
dignity and nonchalance, eyes firmly latched on Elphaba.

Through the rafiqi, the Elephant then said, “Daughter of the dragon, I too am under a spell. I
know how it may be broken-but I choose to live as a changeling. An Elephant is a hunted thing in
these times. The Scrow approve of me. They have worshipped elephants from the time before
language, the time before history began. They know I am not a goddess. They know I am a beast who
chooses magical incarceration as a human over the dangerous liberty of my own powerful form.
“When the times are a crucible, when the air is full of crisis,” she said, “those who are the most
themselves are the victims.”
Elphie could only look, she could not speak.
“But the choice to save yourself can itself be deadly,” said the Princess Nastoya.
Elphie nodded, looked away, looked back.
“I will give you three crows as your familiars,” said the Princess. “You are in hiding as a witch
now. That is your guise.” She spoke a word to the crows, and three mangy, evil-looking things came
and waited nearby.
“A witch?” Elphaba said. What her father would think! “Hiding from what?”
“We have the same enemy,” replied the Princess. “We are both at risk. If you need help send the
crows. If I am still alive, as an old matriarch monarch, or as a free Elephant, I’ll come to your aid.”
“Why?” asked Elphie.
“Because no retreat from the world can mask what is in your face,” she answered.
The Princess said more. It had been years-more than a decade- since Elphie had been able to
talk to an Animal. Who, Elphie asked the Princess, had enchanted her? But the Princess Nastoya
wouldn’t say-in part as self-protection, for the death of the enchanter could sometimes mean the
revocation of binding spells, and her curse was her safety.
“But is life worth living in the wrong form?” said Elphie.
“The interior doesn’t change,” she answered, “except by selfinvolvement. Of which be not
afraid, and also beware.”
“I have no interior,” said Elphaba.
“Something told those bees to kill the cook,” said the Princess Nastoya, with a glitter in her eye.
Elphaba felt herself go pale.
“I didii’t!” she said. “No, it couldn’t have been me! And how did you know?”
“You did, on some level. You are a strong woman. And I can hear bees, you know. My ears are
keen.”
“I would like to stay here with you,” said Elphaba. “Life has been very hard. If you can hear me
when I cannot hear myself-something the Superior Maunt could never do-you could help me do no
harm in this world. That’s all I want-to do no harm.”
“By your own admission, you have a job to do,” said the Princess. She curled her trunk around
Elphaba’s face, feeling its contours and truths. “Go and do it.”
“May I return to you?” asked Elphie.
But the Princess wouldn’t answer. She was tiring-she was an old old thing even for an
Elephant. Her trunk went back and forth like a pendulum on a clock. Then the great nose-hand came
forward and set itself with wonderful weight and precision on Elphaba’s shoulders, and curled a bit
around her neck. “Listen to me, sister,” she said. “Remember this:
Nothing is written in the stars. Not these stars, nor any others. No one controls your destiny.”
Elphaba could not answer, so shocked was she at the touch. She backed away when dismissed,
her mind all but out of her.
Then the return on camels across the shuddering colors of night grass: hypnotic, vague, and
distressing.
Yet there was blessing in this night. Elphaba had forgotten blessing, too-like so much else.

They left the Scrow encampment and the Princess Nastoya behind. The Grasstrail Train moved
in a circle north, now, a wide arch.
Igo died, and was buried in a sandy mound. “Give his spirit movement and flight,” said Elphie
at the ceremony.
The rafiqi admitted later that he had thought one of the guests of the command meeting with the
Princess Nastoya was to be sacrfficed in a ritual slaughter. It had happened before. The Princess,
though coping with her dilemma, was not above a sense of revenge. It was the honesty of Pinchweed
that saved him, as he was the obvious choice. Or perhaps Igo wore the prospect of his death closer
to the surface than humans could see, and the Elephant took pity.
The crows were annoying; they pestered the bees, shat all over the wagon, teased Killyjoy. The
Glikkun, Raraynee, stopped at a well, met her isolated widower husband-to-be, and left the
Grasstrail Train. The toothless new husband already had six motherless children, and they took to
Raraynee like orphaned ducklings behind a farm dog. There were only ten travelers left.
“Now we’re entering Atjiki tribal lands,” said the rafiqi.
The first Arjiki band approached a few days later. They wore nothing so splendid as what
Fiyero had worn, in the way of blue markings-these were nomads, shepherds, rounding up the sheep
from the western foothills of the Great Kells for their annual counting and, it seemed, sale to the
East. Still, just the handsome look of them ripped Elphie’s heart into pieces. Their wildness. Their
otherness. This may be a punishment to the hour of my death, she thought.
The Grasstrail Train by now was down to only two wagons: in one, the rafiqi, Oatsie, Liir the
boy, Pinchweed the entrepreneur, and a Gillikinese mechanic named Kowpp. In the other, Elphie
herself, and the bees, the crows, and Killyjoy. Already she had, it seemed, been accepted as a witch.
It was not an entirely unlikable disguise.
Kiamo Ko was just a week away.
The Grasstrail Train turned eastward, into the steel gray passes of the steep Great Kells. Winter
was almost here, and the last travelers were grateful that the snows had held off. Oatsie intended to
stop the winter in an Arjiki camp some twenty miles on. In the spring she would head back to the
Emerald City, making the northern route through Ugabu, and the Pertha Hills of Gillikin. Elphie
thought of sending a note to Glinda, if after all these years she was still there-but, being unable to
decide yes, she decided no.
“Tomorrow,” said Oatsie, “we’ll see Kiamo Ko. The mountain stronghold of the ruling clan of
the Arjikis. Are you ready, Sister Elphie?”
She was teasing, and Elphie didn’t like it. “I am no longer a sister, I am a witch,” she said, and
tried to think poisonous thoughts at Oatsje. But Oatsie was a stronger person than the cook,
apparently, for she just laughed and went on her way.
The Grasstrail Train stopped on the side of a small tarn. The others said its water was
refreshing, though Icy cold; Elphie didn’t know or care about that. But in the middle was an island-a
tiny thing, the size of a mattress, sprouting one leafless tree like an umbrella that has lost its fabric.
Before Elphaba could quite make it out-the evening light came early at this time of year, and
even earlier in the mountains-Killyjoy had plunged feverishly into the water, and splashed and swum
his way to the island, intent on some small movement or interesting scent he had picked up. He
ferreted in the sedge, and then clamped his teeth-the most woiflike of his features-gently around the
skull of a small beast in the grass.
Elphie couldn’t see but it looked like a baby.
Oatsie screamed, Liir quivered like a blob of jelly, Killyjoy released his grip, but only to get a
further hold; he was drooling over the scalp of the thing he had caught.
There was no way to go through the water-that would be death- But her feet went Out anyway-

They hit the water hard, the water hit hard back- The water turned to ice as she ran-foot by foot of
ice under foot
by foot of hurry. A silvering plate formed instantly, cantilevering forward, making a cold safe
bridge to the islandWhere Killyjoy could be scolded, and the baby saved, though she hadn’t dared hope she could
be in time. She pried Killyjoy’s jaws apart, and scooped up the thing. It shivered in terror and the
cold. Its bright black eyes were alert and watching, ready to upbraid or condemn or love, same as
any capable adult thing.
The others were surprised to see it, as surprised as they’d been to see the ice form, perhaps by
some magic spell left on the tarn from some passing wizard or witch. It was a small monkey-of the
variety called the snow monkey. A baby abandoned by its mother and its tribe, or maybe separated
by accident?
It didn’t think much of Killyjoy but it liked the warmth of the wagon.
They pitched their camp halfway up the perilous slope to Kiamo Ko. The castle rose in steep
black angles out of black rock. Elphie could see it perched above them like an eagle with folded
wings; its conical-roofed towers, its battlements and bartizans, its portcullis and arrow-slit
windows-they all belied its original intention as the head of a waterworks. Below it wound a
powerful tributary of the Vinkus River on which the Ozma Regent once had meant to build a dam and
channel water into the center of Oz-back when the droughts were their most threatening. Fiyero’s
father had taken this stronghold by siege and storm and made it the seat of the Arjiki princes, before
dying and leaving the clan leadership to his only son, if Elphaba remembered rightly.
The small luggage was packed, the bees hummed (their melodies ever more amusing as she
listened, week by week), Killyjoy was still sulking over being denied the kill, the crows sensed that
a change was coming and wouldn’t eat dinner. The monkey, who was called Chistery because of the
sound he made, chittered and chattered now that he was warm and safe.
Around the campfire good-byes were spoken, a few toasts, even a few regrets. The sky was
blacker than it had been before: perhaps it was the contrast of the whiteness of snowy peaks all
around. Liir showed up with a parcel of clothing and some sort of musical instrument, and said goodbyes too.
“Oh, so you’re stopping here, are you?” said Elphie.
“Yes,” he said, “with you.”
“With the crows, with the monkey, with the bees, with the dog, and with the Witch?” she said.
“With me?”
“Where else can I go?” he asked.
“I’m sure I don’t know,” she answered.
“I can take care of the dog,” he said calmly. “I can collect the honey for you.”
“It makes no difference to me,” she said.
“All tight,” he said, and so Liir prepared to enter his father’s house.
Sarima,” said her youngest sister, “wake up. Naptime’s over. We have
a houseguest at supper, and I need to know if we have to kill a hen.
There are so few left, and what we give the traveler we miss all winter in
eggs. . . What do you think?”
The Dowager Princess of the Arjikis groaned. “Details, details,” she said, “can’t I train you to
figure out anything for yourself?”
“Very well,” snapped the sister, “I shall decide, and thenyou can go without your morning egg
when we’re one short.”
“Oh Six, don’t mind me,” said Sarima, “it’s just that I’m scarcely awake. Who is it? Some

patriarch with bad breath, who plans to bore us with tales of the hunting he did fifty years ago? Why
do we allow it?”
“It’s a woman-more or less,” said Six.
“Now that’s uncalled for,” said Sarima, sitting up. “We are none of us the blushing nymphs we
once were, Six.” From across the room she saw herself reflected in the wardrobe glass: pale as milk
pudding, her still pretty face nestled in the puddles of fat that fell according to the laws of gravity.
“Just because you’re the youngest, Six, and can still locate your waist, there’s no need to be unkind.”
Six pouted. “Well, it’s just a woman, then: so chicken or no? Tell me now so Four can hack off
its head and get to plucking, or we won’t eat before midnight.”
“We’ll have fruit and cheese and bread and fish. Is there fish in the fishwell, I suppose?” Yes,
there was. Six turned to go, but remembered to say, “I brought you a glass of sweet tea, it’s there on
your vanity.”
“Bless you. Now tell me, without sarcasm if you please, what’s our guest like, really?”
“Green as sin, thin and crooked, older than any of us. Dressed in black like an old maunt-but not
all that old. I’d guess about, oh, thirty, thirty-two? She won’t give her name.”
“Green? How divine,” said SarIma.
“Divine isn’t the word that comes to mind,” said Six.
“You don’t mean green with jealousy-you mean actually green?”
“Maybe it’s from jealousy, I could not say, but she is surely green. Genuine grass green.”
“Oh la. Well, I’ll wear white tonight so as not to clash. Is she alone?”
“She came in with the caravan we saw down in the valley yesterday. She stopped here with a
little company of beasts-a wolfdog, a hive of bees, a youth, some crows, and a baby monkey.”
“What’ll she do with all of them in the mountains in winter?”
“Ask her yourself.” Six wrinkled her nose. “She made me shudder.”
“Half-set gelatin makesyou shudder. When’s dinner tonight?”
“Seven chimes and a half. She turns my stomach.”
Six left, having run out of expressions of disgust, and Sarima had her tea in bed until her
bladder complained. Six had banked up the fire and drawn the curtains, but Sarima pulled them back
to look down into the courtyard. Kiamo Ko boasted corner turrets and towers, built on massive
circular salients thrusting upward from the stone of the mountain itself. After the Arjiki clan had
wrested the building from the waterworks commission, they had added toothy crenellations for
defense. Despite the reworkings, the plan of the house was still simple. It was built in the general
shape of a U, a central hall with two long narrow wings thrusting forward around a steeply pitched
yard. When it rained, the water churned over the cobbles, and slipped out under the carved gates of
iron oak and jasper panels, past the sickly cluster of village houses nestled up against the castle’s
outside walls. At this hour the courtyard was charcoal gray. Cold and filthy with scraps of hay and
bits of leaf flying in the wind. There was a light in the old cobbler’s shed, and smoke spinning from
the chimney that badly wanted repointing-like everything else in this decaying manse. Sarima was
glad the guest hadn’t been shown into the house proper. As Dowager Princess of the Arjikis, she
enjoyed the privilege of welcoming a traveler into the private chambers of Kiamo Ko.
After bathing, snc urcsscu in a wniic snut won wniic piping, and put on the beautiful torque that
had arrived, like a message from the Other Land, from her dear departed husband several months
after the Incident. Out of habit Sarima shed a few tears admiring herself within the flat embrace of its
jeweled, segmented collar. If it was too dressy for this itinerant, Sarima could always drape a
napkin over it. But she would still know it was there. Even before her tears had dried she was
humming, looking forward to the novelty of a guest.
She peeped in on the children before going down. They were jumpy; strangers always did that

to them. Irji and Manek, twelve and eleven, were almost old enough to want to bust out of this nest of
venomous doves. Irji was soft and cried a lot, but Manek was a little bantam, always had been. If she
let them go off to the Grasslands with the clan, in the summer migration, they both might have their
throats slit-there were too many clansmen to claim leadership for themselves or their sons. So
Sarima had kept her boys near.
Her daughter, Nor, long-legged and thumb-sucking at nine years old, still needed a lap to crawl
into before going to sleep. Dressed for the meal, Sarima was inclined to forbid it, but relented. Nor
had a delicate lisp and she said wunning in the wain for running in the rain. She befriended stones
and candles and blades of grass that grew against all logic in the cracks of the coping stones around
the windows. She sighed and rubbed her face against the torque and said, “There’s a boy too, Mama.
We played with him in the mill yard.”
“What’s he like? Is he green too?”
“Nah. He’s all right. He’s a big baby-fat and strong, and Manek was throwing stones at him to
see how far they would bounce off him. He let him do it. Maybe if you’re so fat it doesn’t hurt?”
“I doubt it. What’s his name?”
“Liir. Isn’t that a queer name?”
“It sounds foreign. And his mother?”
“I don’t know her name and I don’t think she’s his mother. He wouldn’t say when we asked. Irji
said he must be a bastard. Liir said he didn’t care. He’s nice.” She moved her right thumb to her
mouth, and with her left hand felt the cloth of Sarima’s gown just below the torque, until she found a
nipple, and she ran her thumb over it lovingly as if it
- white
were a small pet. “Manek made him pull down his trousers so we could make sure his thing
wasn’t green.”
Sarima disapproved-on the grounds of hospitality if nothing else-but was compelled to ask,
“And what did you see?”
“Oh wellyou know.” Nor turned her head into her mother’s neck, and then sneezed from the
powder with which Sarima kept her chins from chafing. “Stupid-looking boy’s thing. Smaller than
Manek and Irji. But not green. I was so bored I didn’t look much.”
“Neither would I. That was very rude.”
“I didn’t make him do it. Manek did!”
“Well, no more of that. Now let’s have a story before sleeping. I’ve got to go down soon, so a
short one. What do you want to hear, my little one?”
“I want to hear the story of the Witch and the fox babies.”
With less drama than usual Sarima rattled through the tale of how the three fox babies were
kidnapped and caged and fed to fatness, in preparation for a cheese-and-foxling casserole, and how
the Witch went to get fire from the sun to cook them. But when the Witch came back to her cave,
exhausted and in possession of father flame, the foxlings outwitted her by singing a lullaby to make
her sleep. When the Witch’s arm fell, the flame from the sun burned the door off the cage, and out the
foxlings ran. Then they howled down old mother moon to come and stand as an unmovable door in
the entrance of the cave. Sarima ended with the traditional back-and-forth. “And there the wicked
old Witch stayed, for a good long time.”
“Did she ever come out?” asked Nor, doing her line from an almost hypnagogic state.
“Not yet,” said Sarima, kissing and biting her daughter on the wrist, which made them both
giggle, and then lights out.
The stairs from Sarima’s private apartment ran without railings down into the castle keep,
hugging first one wall and then, after the corner, another. She descended the first flight full of grace

and self-possession, her white skirts billowing, her torque a yoke of soft colors and precious metals,
her face a careful composition of welcome.
At the landing she saw the traveler, sitting on a bench in an alcove, looking up at her.
She made it down the second ffight to the flagstoned level, aware of
the cynicism that seethed beneath her loyal remembrance of Fiyero, aware of her overbite; of
her lost prettiness; of her weight; of the silliness of being the doyenne over nothing but irritating
children and backbiting younger sisters; of the thin pretense of authority that scarcely masked her fear
of the present, the future, and even the past.
“How do you do,” she managed.
“You are Sarima,” said the woman, standing, her stalactite of chin thrust forward like a rotted
swede.
“Likely to be!” she said, glad of the torque; it seemed like a shield now, to protect her heart
from being punctured by that chin. “Greetings to you, my friend. Yes, I am Sarima, mistress of Kiamo
Ko. Where do you come from, and how are you called?”
“I come from the back of the wind,” said the woman, “and I have given up my name so often I
don’t like to bring it out again for you.”
“Well, you are welcome here,” said Sarima as smoothly as she could, “but if we have nothing
else to call you by, you will have to be Auntie. Will you come in to dine? We’ll be serving out
soon.”
“I won’t eat until we speak,” said the guest. “Not under your roof in false pretenses for one
night; I’d rather lie at the bottom of a lake. Sarima, I know who you are. I went to school with your
husband. I’ve known about you for a dozen years or so.”
“Of course,” said Sarima then, things clicking. The old, treasured details of her husband’s life
came rushing up. “Of course Fiyero talked of you-and of your sister, Nessie, right? Nessarose. And
of the glamorous Glinda, with whom I think he was a little in love, and the playful inverted boys, and
Avaric, and solid old Boq! I had wondered if that happy time of his life was always to be selfcontained, always his and never mine-you are good to have come to call. I should have liked a
season or two at Shiz, but I didn’t have the brains, I fear, nor my family the money. I would have
remembered you in a minute, well, the color of your skin, there’s nothing like it, is there? Or am I too
provincial?”
“No, it’s unique,” said the guest. “Before we say ten sentences of polite nonsense to each other,
I have to tell you something, Sarima. I think I was the cause of Fiyero’s death-“
“Well, you’re not the only one,” interrupted Sarima, “it’s a national pastime out here, blaming
oneself for the death of a prince. An opportu
nity for public grieving and atonement, which I secretly believe people enjoy just a little bit.”
The guest twisted her fingers, as if to pry open a space for herself in Sarima’s opinions. “I can
tell you how, I want to tell you-“
“Not unless I want to hear it, which is my prerogative. This is my house and I choose to hear
what I want.”
“You must hear it, so that I can be forgiven,” said the woman, turning her shoulders this way
and that, almost as if she were a beast of burden with an invisible yoke on her.
Sarima did not like to be ambushed in her own home. Time enough to consider these sudden
implications. When she felt up to it. And not until. She reminded herself that she was in charge. And
thus she could afford to be kind.
“If I remember rightly,” said Sarima-her mind was racing with memory-“you’re the one, Fiyero
talked of you, of course-Elphaba, that’s it-you’re the one who didn’t believe in the soul. I remember
that much, so what’s to forgive, dearie? I know you’re travel weary-it’s impossible to get here

without being travel weary-and you need a good hot meal and a few nights of sleep, and we’ll chat
some morning next week?”
Sarima linked her arm with Elphaba’s. “But I’ll preserve your name from them, if you like,”
said Sarima. She walked Elphaba through the tall warped oak doors into the dining hall and called,
“Look who’s here, Auntie Guest.” The sisters were standing beside their chairs, hungry and curious
and impatient. Four had the ladle in the tureen, snm , Six had dressed in a hostile puce; Two and
Three, the twins, looked piously at their prayer cards; Five was smoking and blowing concentric
rings toward the platter of yellow eyeless fish they had dragged up from the underground lake.
“Sisters, rejoice, an old friend of Fiyero’s has come to share fond memories and enliven our lives.
Welcome her as you do me.” Perhaps an unfortunate choice of words, as the sisters all resented and
despised Sarima. Why had she married someone who would die so early and condemn them not just
to spinsterhood but to deprivation and denial?
Elphaba didn’t speak through the entire meal or look up from her plate. She devoured the fish,
though, and the cheese and the fruit. Sarima deduced from her eating habits that she had lived under a
rule of silence at meals, and wasn’t surprised, later, to hear about the mauntery.
They took a glass of precious sherry in the music room, and Six entertained them with a
wobbling nocturne. The guest looked miserable, which made the sisters happy. Sarima sighed. The
one thing that could be said about the guest was this: She was older than Sarima. Perhaps, for the
short while of her stay, Elphaba would come out of that sulk and lend an ear to hear how troubling
and trying Sarima’s life was. It would be nice to chat with someone not in the family.
A week passed before Sarima said to Three, “Please tell our Auntie Guest that I’d like to see
her tomorrow for elevenses in the Solar.” Sarima thought that Elphaba had had enough time now to
get the measure of things. The suffering green woman was in some sort of slow-motion thrall, or fit.
She moved jerkily, stalking about the courtyard, or stamping in to meals as if trying to poke holes in
the flooring with her heels. Her elbows were always bent at right angles, and her hands clenched and
unclenched themselves.
Sarima felt stronger than ever, which wasn’t very. It did her some good to have a contemporary
around, however thwarted she might be. The sisters disapproved of Sarima’s cordiality, but the
higher mountain passes were already closed for the winter, and you just couldn’t send a stranger
packing into the treacherous valleys. The sisters conferred in their parlor, as they busied themselves
knitting hateful gray potholders for the undeserving poor at Lurlinemas. She’s sick, they said; she’s
inert, unfinished (even more than they were, was the unspoken corollary, an immenseiy gratifying
notion); she’s damned. And is that fat balloon of a boy her son, or a child slave, or is he one of her
familiars? Behind Sarima’s back they called the woman living in the cobbleshed Auntie Witch,
echoing the old legends of Kumbricia, which were viler-and more persistent-in the Kells than
elsewhere in Oz.
It was Manek, Sarima’s middle child, who was the most curious. One morning, as the boys all
stood on a battlement pissing over the side (a game poor Nor had to pretend no interest in), Manek
said, “What if we peed on Auntie? Would she scream?”
“She’d turn you into a toad,” said Liir.
“No, I mean would it hurt her? She looks like water gives her thi aches and shakes. Does she
even drink it? Or does it make her insides hurt?”
Liir, not an especially observant child, said. “I think she doesn’ drink it. Sometimes she washes
things, but she uses sticks and brushes We better not pee on her.”
“And what does she do with all those bees and the monkey? An they magic?”
“Yeah,” said Liir.
“What kind of magic?”

“I don’t know.” They stepped away from the dizzying drop and No came running up. “I have a
magic straw,” she said, holding up a browi bristle. “From the Witch’s broom.”
“Is the broom magic?” said Manek to Liir.
“Yes. It can sweep the floor real fast.”
“Can it talk? Is it enchanted? What does it say?”
They got more interested, and Liir bloomed and blushed unde their curiosity. “I can’t tell. It’s a
secret.”
“Is it still a secret if we push you off the tower?”
Liir considered. “What do you mean?”
“Will you tell us or we’ll do it.”
“Don’t push me off the tower, you oafs.”
“If the broom is magic it’ll come flying by and save you. Beside5 you’re so fat you’d probably
bounce.”
Irji and Nor laughed at that, despite themselves. It made a ver funny picture in their minds.
“We only want to know what secrets the broom says to you,” sai’ Manek with a big smile. “So
tell us. Or we’ll push you off.”
“You’re not being nice, he’s company,” said Nor. “Come on, let’s g find some mice in the
pantry and make friends.”
“In a minute. Let’s push Liir off the roof first.”
“No,” said Nor, beginning to cry. “You boys are so mean. Are yoi sure that broom is magic,
Liir?”
But Liir by now didn’t want to say any more.
Manek tossed a pebble off the roof and it seemed a very long tim before the ping of impact.
Liir’s face had, in a matter of moments, developed deep black pockets under the eyes. He held
his hands down by his sides like a traitor at a court martial. “The Witch’ll be so mad at you that she
will hate you,” Liir said.
“I don’t think so,” said Manek, taking a step forward. “She won’t care. She likes the monkey
more than she likes you. She won’t even notice if you’re dead.”
Liir gasped for air. Although he had just peed, the front of his baggy trousers turned dark with
wet. “Look, Irji,” said Manek, and his older brother looked. “He’s not even very good at being alive
is he? It’s not like it would be much of a loss. Come on, Liir, tell roe. What did the damned broom
say to you?”
Liir’s upper torso was going in and out like a bellows. He whispered, “The broom told methat-that-you’re all going to die!”
“Oh, is that all,” said Manek. “We already knew that. Everybody dies. We knew that already.”
“You did?” said Liir, who hadn’t.
“Come on,” Irji said, “come on, let’s catch some mice in the pantry and we can cut off their
tails and use Nor’s magic straw to prick their eyes.”
“No!” said Nor, but liji had swiped the straw from her. Manek and Irji went clattering, looselimbed as marionettes, along the parapet and down the stairs. With a huge, aggrieved sigh, Liir
composed himself and adjusted his clothes, and followed them like a condemned dwarf laborer in
the emerald mines. Nor stayed behind, her arms folded defiantly, her chin working with frustration.
Then she spit over the edge and felt better, and chased after the boys.
At midmorning, Six showed the guest into the Solar. With a smirk behind Auntie’s back, she
deposited a tray of cruel little biscuits, hard as slate, on a table covered with a carpet gone brown
and patternless. Sarima, having made her way through what she could of her daily spiritual ablutions,
felt ready.

“You’ve been here a week and it’s likely to be longer,” said Sarima, allowing Six to pour out
some gallroot coffee before dismissing her. “The trail north is snowed in by now, and there’s not a
safe haven between here and the plains. The winters are hard in the mountains, and while we can
make do with our stores and our own company, we treasure a change.
Milk? I do not know exactly what you had-intended. Once you had visited us sufficiently, I
mean.”
“There are rumors of caves in these Kells,” Elphaba said, almost more to herself than to
Sarima. “I lived for some years at the Cloister of Saint Glinda in the Shale Shallows, outside of the
Emerald City. Dignitaries would visit, and while we were often under a vow of silence, nonetheless
people would talk of what they knew. Monastic cells. I had thought, when I was done here, that I
might take myself to a cave and-and-“
“And set up housekeeping,” said Sarima, as if this were as usual as marrying and bearing
babies. “Some do it, I know. There’s an old hermit on the western slope of Broken Bottle-that’s a
peak nearby-they say he’s been there for some years, and has reverted to a more primitive moment of
nature. Of his nature, I mean.”
“A life without words,” Elphie said, looking in her coffee and not drinking it.
“They say this hermit has forgotten about personal hygiene,” said Sarima, “which, given how
the boys smell when they go unwashed for a couple of weeks, strikes me as nature’s defense against
marauding beasts.”
“I didn’t expect to be here for a long time,” Elphie said, twisting her head on her neck like a
parrot and looking at Sarima in an odd way. Oh, beware, thought Sarima carefully, though she tended
to like this guest:
Beware, she’s taking the direction of the discussion into her own hands. This won’t do. But the
guest went on: “I had thought that I would have a night or two, maybe three, and could find myself a
hidey-hole before winter set in. I was working on the wrong calendar, I was thinking of how, and
when, winter came to Shiz and the Emerald City. But you’re six weeks ahead here.”
“Ahead in the autumn and behind in the spring, alas,” said Sarima. She took her feet off her
hassock and placed them on the floor, flatly, to indicate seriousness. “Now, my new friend, there are
some things I need to say to you.”
“I have things too,” Elphie said, but Sarima went on this time.
“You will think me an unpolished person, and you are right of course. Oh, when I was selected
to be a child bride, a good governess was hired from Gillikin to teach me and my sisters how to use
verbs and pronouns
and salad forks. And lately I have begun to master reading. But most of what I picked up about
polite behavior was from what Fiyero was good enough to instruct me in when he returned from his
education. No doubt I make social mistakes. You have every right to snigger behind my back.”
“I am not given to sniggering,” snapped Elphaba.
“As it may be. But I still have opinions, and I’m observant even if unschooled. Despite my
sheltered life, married at the age of seven as you may know, raised and reared behind castle curtain
walls. I trust my own sense of things and won’t be dissuaded. So let me continue,” she said, as
Elphaba tried to interrupt. “There is plenty of time and the sun is nice in here, isn’t it? My little
hideaway.
“It seems to me that you have come here to-shall we say-relieve yourself of some sad business
or other. You have the look about you. Don’t be startled, my dear, if there’s a look I do recognize,
it’s the look of someone carrying a burden. Remember, I listen to my sisters, year in and year out, as
they graciously share with me all the ways they hate me, and why.” She smiled, amused at her own
wit. “You want to throw down your burden, throw it down at my feet, or across my shoulders. You

want perhaps to weep a little, to say good-bye, and then to leave. And when you leave here you will
walk right out of the world.”
“I will do no such thing,” said Elphie.
“You will indeed, even if you don’t know it. You will have nothing left to tie you to the world.
But I know my own limits, Auntie Guest, and I know what you’re here for. You told me. You told me
in the hall, you said you felt you were responsible for Fiyero’s death-“
“Don’t. Just don’t. This is my home, I am a nominal Dowager Princess of Duckshit, but I have a
right to hear and I have a right not to hear. Even to make a traveler feel better.”
“Don’t.”
“But I don’t want to burden you, Sarima, I want to unburden you with the truth-if you permit me,
you are the larger, the lighter; forgiveness blesses the donor as well as the receiver.”
“I’ll overlook that remark about my being the larger,” said Sarima. “But I still have the right to
choose. And I think you wish me ill. You
wish me ill and you don’t even know it. You want to punish me for something. Maybe for not
being a good enough wife to Fiyero. You wish me ill and you fool yourself to think it’s some
therapeutic course of tablets.”
“Do you know how he died, at least?” said Elphaba.
“I know it was a violent action, I know his body was never found, I know it was in a little love
nest,” said Sarima, for a minute losing her resolve. “I don’t care to know who it was exactly, but I
have heard enough about that vile Sir Chuffrey to have my strong opin-“
“Sir Chujfrey!”
“I said no. I said no more. Now I have an offer to make of you, Auntie, if you will have it. You
and the boy may move into the southeast tower if you like. There are a couple of big round rooms
with high ceilings, and good light, and you’ll be out of that drafty cobbleshed, and warmer. You’ll
have your own staircase to come and go into the main hall, and you won’t bother the girls and they
won’t trouble you. You can’t stay in that cobbleshed all winter. The boy has been looking pale and
blubbery, I think he’s always cold. You’re there on the condition, I’m afraid, that you accept my
firmest word on these matters. I don’t care to discuss my husband or the affairs of his death with
you.”
Elphaba looked horror-struck, and beaten. “I have no choice but to accept,” she said, “at least
for the time being. But I warn you, I intend to befriend you so thoroughly that you will change your
mind. And I do think you need to hear things, you need to talk about them, as I do-and I can’t leave
into the wilderness until I have your solemn promise of-“
“Enough!” said Sarima. “Call the porter from the gatehouse and have him bring your luggage to
the tower. Come, I’ll show you. You haven’t touched your coffee.” She stood. For an awkward
moment there was respect and suspicion, in equal measure, simmering on the carpet like the dust in
the sunbeams. “Come,” Sarima said, more softly, “at the very least you need to be warm. You must
be able to say that much of us country mice here at Kiamo Ko.”
As far as Elphaba was concerned, it was a witch’s room, and she reveled in it. Like all good
witch’s rooms in children’s stories, it was a
room with bowed walls, following the essential form of a tower. It had one broad window that,
since it faced east, away from the wind, could be unbarred and opened without blowing everyone
and everything out into the snowy valleys. Beyond, the Great Kells were a rank of sentinels, purpleblack when the winter sun rose over them, draining into blue-white screens as the sun moved
overhead, and going golden and ruddy in the late afternoon. There were sometimes rumbling
collapses of ice and scree.
The winter gripped the house. Elphaba learned soon enough to stay put unless she was sure

another room had a warmer fire. And except for Sarima, she didn’t care for the other human company
the house afforded. Sarima lived in the west wing, with the children: the boys Irji and Manek, the
girl Nor. Sarima’s five sisters lived in the east wing-they were called numbers Two through Six, and
if they had ever had other names they had withered away from disuse. By right of their
unmarriageability, the sisters claimed the best rooms in the place, although Sarima had the Solar.
Where Liir curled up to sleep Elphaba did not know, but he reappeared every morning to change the
rags at the bottom of the crows’ perch. He brought her cocoa, too.
Lurlinemas drew near, and out came some tired decorations from which the gilt had all but
vanished. The children spent a whole day tying baubles and toys to the archways, making the grownups bump their heads and curse. Manek and Irji took a saw and without permission went beyond the
castle walls to claim some boughs of spruce and sprigs of holly. Nor stayed behind and painted
scenes of happy life in the castle on sheets of paper that she and Liir had found in Auntie Witch’s
room. Liir said he couldn’t draw, so he wandered off and disappeared, perhaps to stay clear of
Manek and Irji. The house fell still until there was a flurry of copper pans thrown about the kitchen.
Nor went running to see, and Liir arrived from some hiding cubby to look too.
It was Chistery. The monkey was having a fit, and all the sisters, baking gingerbread, were
throwing gobbets of batter at him, trying to knock him off the wheel that hung, noisy with swinging
utensils, above the worktable.
“How’d he get in here?” said Nor.
“Get him out, Liir, call him!” said Two. But Liir had no more authority over Chistery than they
did. The monkey flew to the top of a
wardrobe, then to a huge dried goods canister, and he pulled open a drawer and found a
precious store of raisins, which he stuffed in his mouth. Six said, “Go get the ladder from the hall,
you two, and bring it here,” but when they had, Chistery was back on the wheel, making it whirl and
clatter like a roundabout at a carnival.
Four put a lump of mashed melon in a bowl. Five and Three took off their aprons, ready to rush
him when he came down. Chistery was still eyeing the fruit when the door smacked open against the
wall and Elphaba came lolloping in. “All this commotion, how can you hear yourselves think?” she
cried, and then took in the sight of Chistery, suddenly abject and remorseful, and of the sisters,
poised to ensnare him in their floury aprons.
“What the hell is this?” she said.
“No need to yell,” said Two sulkily, quietly, but they put down their aprons.
“I mean, what is this? What is realiy going on here? You all look like Killyjoy, with blood lust
in your faces! You’re white with rage at this poor beast!”
“I think it’s not rage, it’s flour,” said Five, which made them giggle.
“You filthy savages,” said Elphie. “Chistery come here, come down here. Right now. You
women deserve to be unmarried, so you don’t bring any little savage creepy children into the world.
Don’t you ever lay a hand on this monkey, do you hear me? And how did he get out of my room
anyway? I was in the Solar with your sister.”
“Oh,” said Nor, remembering, “oh, Auntie, I’m sorry. It was us.”
“You?” She turned and looked at Nor as if for the first time, and Nor didn’t like it much. She
shrank back against the door of the cold cellar. “What were you skulking about in my room for?”
said Elphie.
“Some paper,” said Nor faintly, and in a desperate, all-or-nothing gamble, said, “I made some
paintings for everybody, do you want to see, come here.”
Chistery in her arms, Elphaba followed them into the drafty hall, where the wind under the front
door was making the papers flutter against the carved stone. The sisters came too, a safe distance

behind.
Elphie got very quiet. “This is my paper,” she said. “I didn’t say you could use it. Look, it has
words on the back. Do you know what words are?”
“Of course I do, do you think I am slow?” responded Nor sassily.
“You leave my papers alone,” said Elphaba. She and Chistery then flew up the steps, and the
door to the tower slammed behind them.
“Who wants to help roll out the gingerbread?” said Two, relieved that skulls hadn’t been
knocked together. “And this hall looks very pretty, chickadees, I’m sure Preenella and Lurline will
be impressed tonight.” The children went back into the kitchen and made gingerbread people, and
crows, and monkeys, and dogs, but they couldn’t do bees, they were too small. When Irji and Manek
came in, dumping snowy greens on the slate floor, they helped at the gingerbread shapes too, but they
made naughty shapes that they wouldn’t show the younger children, and they kept gobbling up the
raw dough and laughing hysterically at it, which made everyone else testy.
In the morning the children awoke and ran downstairs to see if Lurline and Preenella had been
there. Sure enough, there was a brown wicker basket with a green and gold ribbon on it (a basket
and a ribbon that Sarima’s children had seen many years in a row), and in it were three small
colored boxes, each one with an orange, a puppet, a small sack of marbles, and a gingerbread mouse.
“Where’s mine?” said Liir.
“Don’t see one with your name on it,” said Irji. “Look: Irji. Manek. Nor. Guess Preenella left it
for you at your old house. Where did you used to live?”
“I don’t know,” said Liir, and started to cry.
“Here, you can have the tail of my mouse, just the tail,” said Nor kindly. “First you have to say,
May I please have the tail of your mouse?”
“May I please have the tail of your mouse,” said Liir, though his words were almost
unintelligible.
“And I promise to obey you.”
Liir mumbled on. The exchange was eventually completed. From shame, Liir didn’t mention the
oversight. Sarima and the sisters never took it in.
Elphaba didn’t show her face all day, but she sent down a message that Lurlinemas Eve and
Lurlinemas always made her ill, and she was tak
ing a few days in solitary comfort, and she wanted to be disturbed neither with meals, nor
visitors, nor noise of any kind.
So while Sarima took herself off to her private chapel to remember her dear husband on this
holy day, the sisters and the children all sang carols as loudly as they could.
A few weeks later, when the children were having snowball battles, and Sarima was
concocting some medicinal toddy in the kitchen, Elphie left her room at last and skulked down the
stairs and knocked on the door of the sisters’ parlor.
They didn’t like it, but they felt obliged to welcome her. The silver tray with bottles of hard
liquor, the precious crystal carried on donkey all the way from Dixxi House in Gillikin, the prettiest
and red-richest of native carpets on the floor, the luxury of fireplaces at both sides of the room, each
blazing merrily-well, they would have toned it down some had they had any warning. As it was,
Four hid in the sofa cushions the leather volume from which she had been reading aloud, a racy
history of a poor young woman beset by an abundance of handsome suitors. It had been a gift from
Fiyero once, the best gift he had ever sent the sisters-also the only one.
“Would you like some lemon barley water?” said Six, ever the servant until the day she died,
unless by luck everyone else died sooner.
“Yes, all right,” Elphaba said.

“Do take a seat-this seat here, you’ll find it most comfy.”
Elphie didn’t look as if she wanted to be comfy, but she sat there anyway, stiff and uneasy in
that quilted cocoon of a room.
She took the tiniest sip possible from her drink, as if suspecting hellebore.
“I suppose I need to apologize for that flurry over Chistery,” she said. “I know I am your guest
here at Kiamo Ko. Ijust flew off the handle.”
“\Vell, you did just that,” started Five, but the others said, “Oh, think nothing of it, we all have
days like that, in fact for us it usually happens on the same day, it’s been that way for years . .
“It’s very taxing,” Elphie said with some effort. “I spent many years under a vow of silence,
and I haven’t always learned how-loud-it is
permissible to get. Besides that, this is a foreign culture, in a way.”
“We Aijikis have always been proud of being able to speak to any other citizen in Oz,” said
Two. “We are as equally at home with the ragged vagabond Scrow to our south as with the elite in
the Emerald City to our east.” Not that they’d ever been out of the Vinkus.
“A little nibble?” said Three, bringing out a tin of marzipan fruits.
“No,” Elphie said, “but I wonder what you could tell me of your sister’s particular sadness.”
They sat poised, tempted, and suspicious.
“I enjoy my chats with her in the Solar,” said Elphie, “but whenever the talk gets around to her
departed husband-whom as you may realize I myself knew-she is unwilling to discuss a thing.”
“Oh, well, it was so sad,” said Two.
“A tragedy,” said Three.
“For her,” said Four.
“For us,” said Five.
“Auntie Guest, take a little orange liqueur in your lemon barley,” said Six, “it comes from the
balmy slopes of the Lesser Kells and is quite a luxury.”
“Well, just a drop,” said Elphie, but didn’t sip it. She put her elbows on her knees and leaned
forward and said, “Please tell me how she learned of Fiyero’s death.”
There was a silence. The sisters avoided casting glances at one another, busying themselves
with the pleats of their skirts. After a pause, it was Two who said, “That sad day. It stings in the
memory still.”
The others adjusted themselves in their seats, turning slightly toward her. Elphaba blinked
twice, looking like one of her own crows.
Two told the tale, without sentiment or drama. One of Fiyero’s business colleagues, an Arjiki
trader, had come through the mountain pass at the first spring thaw, on the back of a mountain skark.
He asked to meet with Sanma and insisted her sisters be around to support her at his woeful news.
He told them how, on Lurlinemas, he had received at his club an anonymous message that Fiyero had
been murdered. There was an address in a disreputable area-not even a residential neighborhood.
The clansman hired a couple of brutes and broke down the door of the warehouse. Inside was a
small apartment hidden upstairs, a place of assig
nation, obviously. (The clansman reported this without flinching, perhaps as a powermongering maneuver.) There was evidence of struggle and massive quantities of blood, so thick in
places that it was still tacky. The body had been removed, and it was never recovered.
Elphaba only nodded, grimly, at this recounting.
“For a year,” continued Two, “our dear distraught Sarima refused to believe he was really
dead. We would not have been surprised at a ransom note. But by the following Lurlinemas, when no
further word about it had arrived, we had to accept the inevitable. Besides, the clan had gone on as
long as it could with an ad hoc collaborative leadership; they demanded a single chief, and one was

put forward, and he’s served well. When Irji comes of age he may claim the rights of progenitorship,
if he’s bold enough; he is not yet bold at all. Manek is the more obvious candidate, but he’s only
second in line.”
“And what does Sarima believe happened?” said Elphie. “And you? All of you?”
Now that the grimmest part of the story had been told, the other sisters felt they could chime in.
It emerged that Sarima had for some years suspected Fiyero of having an affair with an old college
chum named Glinda, a Gillikinese girl of legendary beauty.
“Legendary?” Elphie said.
“He told us all how charming she was, how self-effacing, what grace and sparkle-“
“Is it all that likely he’d gush on and on about a woman he was committing adultery with?”
“Men,” said Two, “are, as we all know, both cruel and cunning.
What better ruse than to admit fervently and often that he admired her?
Sarima had no grounds on which to accuse him of slyness and deception.
He never stopped being attentive to her-“
“In his cold, morose, withdrawn, embittered fashion,” interjected Three.
“Hardly the thing one reads about in novels,” said Four.
“if one read novels,” said Five.
“Which we don’t,” said Six, closing her lips over a marzipan pear.
“And so Sarima believes her husband was carrying on with this- this-“
“This dazzler,” said Two. “You must have known her, didn’t you go to Shiz?”
“I knew her a bit,” Elphie said, her mouth forgetting to shut itself. She was having a hard time
keeping up with the multiple narrators. “I haven’t seen her in years.”
“And it is clear in Sarima’s mind what happened,” said Two.
“Glinda was-for all I know still is-married to a wealthy older gentleman named Sir Chuifrey.
He must have suspected something, and had her followed, and found out what was going on. Then he
had some thugs kill the bastard. I mean poor Fiyero. Doesn’t that make sense?”
“It’s entirely plausible,” Elphie said slowly. “But is there any proof?”
“No proof at all,” said Four. “If there were, family honor would have required a retributive
murder of Sir Chuifrey. But he may still be in robust good health. No, it’s only a theory, but it’s what
Sanma believes.”
“Clings to,” said Six.
“And why not,” said Five.
“It’s her prerogative,” said Three.
“Everything’s her prerogative,” said Two sadly. “Besides, think of it. If your husband were
murdered, wouldn’t it be easier to bear if you thought he deserved it, even just a little?”
“No,” Elphie said, “I don’t think it would.”
“Neither do we,” admitted Two, “but we think that’s what she thinks.”
“And you?” Elphie asked, studying the pattern in the carpet, the blood red lozenges, the thorny
margins, the beasts and acanthus leaves and rose medallions. “What do you think?”
“We hardly can be expected to subscribe to a unanimous opinion,” said Two, but she barreled
ahead anyway. “It seems reasonable to suppose that unbeknownst to us, Fiyero had gotten involved
in some political enterprise in the Emerald City.”
“A stay that was to be a month became four,” said Four.
“Had he political-sensibilities?” said Elphaba.
“He was the Prince of the Arjikis,” Five reminded them all. “He had connectionsresponsibilities-allegiances-who of us could guess at them? It was his duty to have opinions on
things we shouldn’t need to know about.”

“Was he sympathetic to the Wizard?” said Elphie.
“Are you saying was he involved in any of those campaigns? Those-pogroms? First the
Quadlirigs, then the Animals?” said Three. “You look surprised that we should know about these
things. Do you think we’re so very removed from the rest of Oz?”
“We are removed,” said Two. “But we listen to talk. We like to feed travelers when they come
to stop. We know life can be rotten out there.”
“The Wizard is a despot,” said Four.
“Our home is our castle,” said Five at the same time. “Some removal from all this is healthy.
We retain our moral fiber, unsullied.”
They all smirked, simultaneously.
“But do you think Fiyero had an opinion about the Wizard?” Elphaba asked again, pressing with
some urgency.
“He kept his own counsel,” snapped Two. “For the sake of sweet Lurline, dear Auntie, he was
a prince and a man!-and we were nothing bitt his younger, dependent sisters-in-law! Do you think he
would confide in us? He could have been a high-level crony of the Wizard for all we know! He
surely would’ve had liaisons with the Palace, he was a prince. Even if only of our small tribe. What
he did with those liaisons-how are we to say? But we don’t think he died as the victim of a jealous
husband. Maybe we’re sheltered, but we don’t. We think he got caught in the crossfire of some fringe
struggle. Or he was found out in the act of betrayal of one excitable group or other. He was a
handsome man,” said Two, “and none of us would deny it, then or now. But he was intense and
private and we doubt he’d have loosened up enough to have an affair.” By the smallest gesture-a
sucking in of her abdomen and a squaring of her shoulders-Two betrayed the foundation of her
position: How could he have succumbed to this Glinda’s charms if he had been able to resist his
own sisters-in-law?
“But,” Elphie asked in a small voice, “do you really think he was a spy for someone?”
“Why was his body never found?” said Two. “If it had been a jealous rage, his body needn’t
have been removed. Perhaps he hadn’t died yet. Perhaps he was taken to be tortured. No, in our
limited experience, we think that this smacks of treachery of a political stripe, not a romantic one.”
“I-” said Elphaba.
“You’re pale, dear. Six, please, a beaker of water-“
“No,” said Elphaba. “It’s just so-one never thought at the time- I never. Shall I tell you what
little I know of it? And perhaps you can mention it to Sarima.” She began to pace. “I saw Fiyero-“
But, at the oddest possible moment, family solidarity kicked in. “Dear Auntie Guest,” said Two,
in a responsible tone, “we are under the strictest orders from our sister not to allow you to tire
yourself by chatting about Fiyero and the sad circumstances of his death.” Clearly Two had to work
to get this out, as the appetite to hear what Elphaba had to say was huge. Stomachs were rumbling for
the meat of it. But propriety won out, or fear of Sarima’s wrath if she were to find out. “No,” said
Two again, “no, I’m afraid we mustn’t express undue interest. We may not listen and we will not tell
Sarima what we hear.”
In the end, Elphaba left them, drooping. “Another time,” she kept saying, “when you’re ready,
when she’s ready. You see it’s essential; there’s so much grief she could be released from-and that
she herself could lift, too-“
“Good-bye for now,” they said, and the door closed behind her. The fires in the twin fireplaces
mirrored back and forth across the room, and they took up positions of frustrated worthiness, at
having to obey their older sister-curse her to hell.
Ice crusted the roofs, dislodged tiles, and dripped dirtily into the private chambers, the music
room, the towers. Elphaba took to wearing her hat indoors to avoid the random icy dart on her scalp.

The crows were mildewy around the beak and had algae between the claws. The sisters finished
their novel, and collectively sighed-for life, for life!-and began to read it again, as they had done for
eight years. In the fierce updraft from the valley, the snow seemed as often to be rising as falling. The
children adored it.
One glum afternoon Sarima bedecked herself in red woolen wraps and, out of boredom, went
wandering through musty, disused rooms. She located a staircase in a trapezoidal, slanting shaftperhaps this high
alcove leaned against the side of the gable you couldn’t see, she wasn’t good at imagining
architecture in three dimensions. She mounted the stairs anyway. At the top, through a crude
grillwork, she saw a figure in the white gloom. Sarima coughed so as not to startle her.
Elphaba was bent almost double over a huge folio laid out on a carpenter’s work bench. She
turned, surprised but not very, and said, “We’ve had the same inclination, how curious.”
“You’ve found some books, I’d completely forgotten,” said Sarima. She could read now, but
not well, and books made her feel inferior. “I couldn’t tell you what they’re all about. So many
words, you’d hardly think the world deserved such scrutiny.”
“Over here is an archaic geography,” said Elphie, “and some records of usufruct pacts among
various families of the Arjiki-I bet there are leaders who would be very happy to see these. Unless
they’re outdated. Some texts that Fiyero had in Shiz-I recognize them too, the life sciences course of
studies.”
“And this big thing-purple pages and silver ink, how grand.”
“I found it on the floor of this wardrobe. It seems to be a Grimmerie,” Elphie said, running her
hand down a page only softly buckled with moisture. It made a pretty contrast, her hand on the
vellum.
“What is that, besides beautiful?”
“As I understand it,” Elphie said, “a sort of encyclopedia of things numinous. Magic; and of the
spirit world; and of things seen and unseen; and of things once and future. I can only make out a line
here or there. Look how it scrambles itself as you watch.” She pointed to a paragraph of handlettered text. Sarima peered. Though her skill at reading was minimal, she gaped at what she saw.
The letters floated and rearranged themselves on the page, as if enlivened. The page was changing its
mind as they watched it. The letters clotted together in a big black snarl, like a mound of ants. Then
Elphaba turned a page. “Here, this section is a book of beasts.” There were elegant, attenuated
drawings in blood red and gold leaf, on the front and rear elevations of (it seemed) an angel, with
notes in a fine hand on the aerodynamic aspects of holiness. The wings flexed up and down and the
angel smiled with a saucy sort of sanctity. “And a recipe on this page. It says ‘Of apples with black
skin and white flesh: to fill the stomach with greed unto Death.”
“I remember this book now,” Sarima said. “I do remember how it came to be here, I even put it
up here myself; I had forgotten. Well, books are so easy to set aside, aren’t they?”
Elphie looked up, her eyes leveling out under her smooth, rocklike brow. “Tell me, Sarima,
please.”
The Dowager Princess of Kiamo Ko was flustered. She went to a small window and tried to
open it, but encrustations of ice prevented her. So she sat down in a flump on a packing crate and
told Elphaba the story. She couldn’t remember exactly when, but it was a long time ago, when
everyone was young and slim. Beloved Fiyero was still alive but he was off in the Grasslands with
the tribe. Complaining of a headache, she was home in the castle all alone. The bell at the
drawbridge sounded and she went to see who it was.
“Madame Morrible,” Elphaba said. “Some Kumbric Witch or other.”
“No, it was no madame. It was an elderly man in a tunic and leggings, with a cloak badly in

need of attention by a seamstress. He said he was a sorcerer, but perhaps he was just mad. He asked
for a meal and a bath, which he got, and then he said he wanted to pay by giving me this book. I told
him with a castle to run I didn’t have much time for frivolity, reading and such. He said never mind.”
Sarima drew her robes about her, and traced a pattern in the cold dust on a nearby stack of
codexes. “He told me a fabulous tale and persuaded me to take this thing from him. He said that it
was a book of knowledge, and that it belonged in another world, but it wasn’t safe there. So he had
brought it here-where it could be hidden and out of harm’s way.”
“What a load of tripe,” said Elphie. “If it came from another world I shouldn’t be able to read
any of it. And I can make out a little.”
“Even if it’s as magic as he says?” said Sarima. “But you know, I believed him. He said there
was more congress between worlds than anyone would credit, that our world has attributes of his,
and his of ours, a kind of leakage effect, or an infection maybe. He had a long fringy whiteand-gray
beard, and a very kind and abstracted manner, and he smelled of garlic and sour cream.”
“Indisputable proof of other-worldliness-“
“Don’t mock me,” said Sarima blandly, “you’ve asked me, so I’m
telling you. He said it was too powerful to be destroyed, but too threatening-to that other placeto be preserved. So he made a magic trip or something and came here.”
“Kiamo Ko called to him and he couldn’t resist her attractions-“
“He said we were isolated, and a stronghold,” said Sarima, “and I couldn’t disagree! And what
did it mean to me to take another book? We just lugged it up here, and put it with the rest. I don’t
even know if I told anyone about it. Then he blessed me and left. He walked with an oak-thorn staff
over the Locklimb Trail.”
“Can you really say you thought the man who brought this here was a sorcerer?” said Elphie.
‘And that this book comes from-another world? Do you even believe in other worlds?”
“I find it a great effort to believe in this one,” said Sarima, “yet it seems to be here, so why
should I trust my skepticism about other worlds? Don’t you believe?”
“I tried to, as a child,” said Elphie. “I made an effort. The mothy, gormless, indistinct sunrise of
salvation world-the Other Land-I couldn’t get it, I couldn’t focus. Now I just think it’s our own lives
that are hidden from us. The mystery-who is that person in the mirror-that’s shocking and
unfathomable enough for me.”
“Well he was a very nice sorcerer, or madman, or whatever.”
“Maybe it was some agent loyal to the Ozma Regent,” said Elphie. “Secreting some ancient
Lurlinist tract here. Anticipating a revival of royalism, a Palace coup, worried about the kidnapped,
sleep-charmed Ozma Tippetarius, coming in disguise to hide this document far away, but still
retrievable
“You are full of conspiracy theories,” said Sarima. “I’ve noticed that about you. This was an
elderly gentleman, very elderly. And he spoke with an accent. He surely was a wandering magician
from some other place. And hasn’t he been right? The thing has sat here, forgotten, for what, ten
years or more already.”
“May I take it and look at it?”
“I don’t care. He never said not to read it,” said Sarima. ‘At the time I perhaps couldn’t read at
all-I forget: But look at that beautiful angel there! Do you really mean to say you don’t believe in the
Other Land? In an afterlife?”
“Just what we need.” Elphaba snorted as she picked up the tome. ‘A post Vale-of-Tears Valeof-Tears.”
One morning, after Six had tried and given up once again at some sort of lessons for the
children, Irji suggested an indoor game of hide-and-seek. They drew straws and Nor lost, so she hid

her eyes and counted. When she got bored with waiting she called out “One hundred!” and looked
about.
She tagged Liir first. Though he liked to disappear alone for hours at a time, he was bad at
hiding when it was required of him. So they hunted together for the older boys, and found Irji in
Sarima’s Solar, crouching behind the velvet ruffles suspended from the perch of a stuffed gryphon.
But Manek, the best at hiding, couldn’t be found. Not in the kitchen, the music room, the towers.
Running out of ideas, the children even dared to go down into the musty basement.
“There’s tunnels from here all the way to hell,” said Irji.
“Where? Why?” said Nor, and Liir echoed.
“They’re hidden. I don’t know where. But everybody says so. Ask Six. I think because this used
to be a waterworks headquarters-it did. Hell burns so hot they need water, and the devils tunneled up
to here.”
Nor said, “Look, Liir, here’s the fishwell.”
In the center of a low-vaulted room, damp with moisture beaded up on its stone walls, stood a
low well with a wooden lid. There was a simple device with a chain and a stone for shifting the lid
sideways. It was child’s play to uncover the shaft.
“Down there,” said Irji, “is where we get the fish we eat. Nobody knows if there’s a whole
lake down there or if it’s bottomless, or if you can go down right to hell.” He moved the rushlight
about, and there was a round of black water shining back a reflection, in chips and circles of chilly
white light.
“Six says there’s a gold carp in there,” said Nor. “She saw it once. Biggest old thing, she
thought it was a floating brass kettle bobbing to the surface, and then it turned and looked at her.”
“Maybe it was a brass kettle,” said Liir.
“Kettles don’t have eyes,” said Nor.
‘Anyway, Manek’s not here,” said Irji. “Is he?” He called, “Hello, Manek,” and the echo rolled
and dissolved in the wet dark.
“Maybe Manek went down to hell in one of those tunnels,” said Liir.
Irji swung the lid back on the fishwell. “But you’re it, Nor, I’m not going to look down here
anymore.”
They gave themselves the creeps, and raced back upstairs. Four yelled at them for making too
much noise.
Nor found Manek at last on the stairs outside the door to Auntie Guest’s rooms. “Shhh,” he said
as they came near, and Nor tapped him anyway, saying, “You’re out.”
“Shhh,” he said again, more urgently.
They took turns looking through the crack in the weathered grain of the door.
Auntie had her finger in a book, and she was mumbling things to herself, sounding them out this
way and that. On the dresser next to her squatted Chistery, in an uneasy, obedient silence.
“What’s happening?” said Nor.
“She’s trying to teach him to talk,” said Manek.
“Let me look,” said Liir.
“Say spirit,” said Auntie in a kind voice. “Say spirit. Spirit. Spirit.”
Chistery twisted his mouth to one side, as if considering it.
“There is no difference,” said Auntie to herself, or maybe to Chistery. “The strands are the
same, the skeins are the same; the rock remembers; the water has memory; the air has a past for
which it can be held accountable; the flame renews itself like a pfenix. What is an animal, but made
of rock and water and fire and ether! Remember how to speak, Chistery. You are animal, but Animal
is your cousin, damn you. Say spirit.”

Chistery picked a nit off his chest and ate it.
“Spirit,” sang Auntie, “there is spirit, I know it. Spirit!”
“Spit,” said Chistery, or something like it.
Irji shoved Manek aside and the children almost fell through the door trying to see Auntie laugh
and dance and sing. She picked up Chistery and hugged him, and said, “Spirit, oh spirit, Chistery!
There is spirit! Say spirit!”
“Spit, spit, spit,” said Chistery, unimpressed with himself. “Spite.”
But Killyjoy woke from a nap at the sound of a new voice.
“Spirit,” said Auntie.
“Speared,” said Chistery patiently. “Spared. Spored. Sput spot sput. Spat spate spit, speed
spurt spot.”
“Spirit,” said Auntie, “oh, my Chistery, we’ll find ourselves a link with Doctor Dillamond’s
old work yet! There is a universal design among us all, could we get in deeply enough to see!
Everything is not In vain! Spirit, my friend, spirit!”
“Sport,” said Chistery.
The children couldn’t stop laughing. They clattered down the stairs and fell into the dormitory,
and giggled into the bedclothes.
They didn’t mention what they saw to Sarima or the sisters. They were afraid Auntie would be
stopped, and they all wanted Chistery to learn enough language so that he could play with them.
One windless day, when it seemed they must get out of Kiamo Ko or expire of boredom, Sarima
had the idea that they go skating on a nearby pond. The sisters agreed, and dug out the rusting skates
Fiyero had brought back from the Emerald City. The sisters baked caramel sweets and prepared
flasks of cocoa, and even decorated themselves with green and gold ribbons, as if it were a second
Lurlinemas. Sarima adorned herself in a brown velvet robe with fur tippets, the children put on extra
trousers and tunics, and even Elphaba came along, in a thick cloak of purple brocade and heavy
Arjiki goatskin boots, and mittens, carrying her broom. Chistery lugged along a basket of dried
apricots. The sisters in sensible men’s tribal overcoats, belted and latched, drew up the rear.
The villagers had cleared the snow off the center of the pond. It was a ballroom dance floor of
silver plate, engraved with the flourishes of a thousand arabesques, mounded round with pillows and
bolsters of snow to provide a safe repose for skaters who forget how to brake or turn. In the fierce
sunlight, the mountains looked razor sharp against the blue; great snowy egrets and ice griffons
wheeled high above. The ice rink was already noisy with screaming urchins and lurching
adolescents (taking every opportunity to tumble and heap each other cozily in suggestive positions).
Their elders moved more slowly, processionally around the
ice. The crowd fell silent as the household of Kiamo Ko approached, but, children being
children, the silence didn’t last for long.
Sarima ventured out onto the ice, her sisters in a knot around her with linked arms. Being
largish, Sarima was nervous of falling, nor were her ankles strong. But before long she had
remembered how things went-this foot, then that, long languorous strides-and the uneasy meeting of
social classes was accomplished. Elphaba looked like one of her crows: knees out, elbows flailing,
rags flapping, gloved hands raking for balance.
After the adults had had enough excitement (but the children were only still warming up) Sarima
and the sisters and Elphie collapsed on some bearskins that the citizenry had spread out for them.
“In the summer,” said Sarima, “we have a huge bonfire and slaughter some pigs, before the men
descend to the plains, or the boys ascend to the slopes to guard the sheep and the goats. They all
come into the castle for a chew of pork and a few tankards of ale. And of course, any time there’s a
mountain lion or a particularly nasty bear, we let them into the keep until the beast is killed or

wanders away.” She smiled with noblesse oblige in an abbreviated way, off into the middle
distance, though the locals were ignoring the castle folk by now. ‘Auntie dear, you looked quite the
sight in that robe, and poking along with that broom.”
“Liir says it’s a magic broom,” said Nor, who had run up to throw a handful of granular
snowflakes into her mother’s face. Elphaba turned her head quickly and tugged her collar up to avoid
ricocheting snow spray. Nor laughed unkindly in a beautiful phrase like a woodwind, and scampered
away.
“So tell us how your broom came to be magic,” said Sarima.
“I never said it was magic. I got it from an elderly maunt named Mother Yaclde. She took me
under her wing, when she was alert enough, and gave me-well, guidance, I suppose you’d call it.”
“Guidance,” said Sarima.
“The old maunt said the broom would be my link to my destiny,” said Elphie. “I assume she
meant that my destiny was domestic. Not magic.”
“Join the sisterhood.” Sarima yawned.
“I never knew if Mother Yackle was completely mad or a wise, prophetic old hen,” said
Elphie, but the others weren’t listening, so she lapsed into silence.
After a while Nor came flinging herself into her mother’s lap again. “Tell me a story, Mama,”
she said. “Those boys are nasty.”
“Boys are vexing creatures,” agreed her mother. “Sometimes. Shall I tell you the story of when
you were born?”
“No, not that,” said Nor, yawning. ‘A real story. Tell me about the Witch and the fox babies
again.”
Sarima protested, knowing full well that the children considered Auntie Guest a witch. But Nor
was stubborn and Sarima relented, and told the tale. Elphaba listened. Her father had taught her
moral precepts, had lectured her about responsibility; Nanny had gossiped; Nessarose had whined.
But no one had told stories to her when she was young. She pulled herself forward a little so she
could hear over the noise of the crowd.
Sarima recited the tale with little dramatic involvement, but even so, Elphaba felt a twinge
when she heard the conclusion. ‘And there the wicked old Witch stayed, for a good long time.”
“Did she ever come out?” recited Nor, eyes gleaming with the fun of the ritual.
“Not yet,” answered Sarima, and leaned forward, pretending to bite Nor on the neck. Nor
squealed and jiggled herself away, and ran to rejoin the boys.
“I think that’s shameful, even if it’s just a story, to propose an afterlife for evil,” said Elphaba.
“Any afterlife notion is a manipulation and a sop. It’s shameful the way the unionists and the pagans
both keep talking up hell for intimidation and the airy Other Land for reward.”
“Don’t,” Sarima said. “For one thing, that’s where Fiyero is waiting for me. And you know it.”
Elphaba’s jaw dropped. When she least expected it, Sarima always seemed ready to rush in
with a surprise attack. “In the afterlife?” said Elphie.
“Oh, what you do take against,” said Sarima. “I pity the community of the afterlife when they’re
asked to welcomeyou in. What a sour apple you always are.”
She’s crazy,” said Manek knowledgeably. “Everyone knows that you can’t teach an animal to
talk.”
They were in the abandoned summer stable, jumping off a loft, making puffs of hay and snow
billow in the patchy light.
“Well, what is she doing with Chistery then?” asked Irji. “If you’re so sure of it?”
“She’s teaching him to mimic, like a parrot,” said Manek.
“I think she’s magic,” said Nor.

“You, you think everything’s magic,” Manek said. “Stupid girl.”
“Well, everything is,” said Nor, launching herself away from the boys as a further editorial
comment on their skepticism.
“Do you really think she’s magic?” said Manek to Liir. “You know her better than any of us.
She’s your mother.”
“She’s my Auntie, isn’t she?” Liir said.
“She’s our Auntie, she’syour mother.”
“I know,” said Irji, pretending full immersion in the topic to avoid another jump. “Liir is
Chistery’s brother. Liir is what Chistery was like before she taught him how to talk. You’re a
monkey, Liir.”
“I’m not a monkey,” said Liir, “and I’m not magicked.”
“Vv’ell, let’s go ask Chistery,” said Manek. “Is this the day that Auntie has her coffee with
Mama? Let’s go see if Chistery has learned enough words to answer some questions.”
They scampered up the stone spiral staircase to Auntie Witch’s apartment.
True, she was gone, and there was Chistery nibbling on some nutshells, and KIllyjoy dozing by
the fire, growling in his sleep, and the bees doing their ceaseless chorus. The children didn’t like
bees much, nor did they care for Killyjoy. Even Liir had lost interest in the dog once he had children
to play with. But Chistery was a favorite. “Sweet thing, oh the little baby,” said Nor. “Here, you
little beast, come to Auntie Nor.” The monkey looked doubtful, but then on knuckles and capable feet
he swung across the floor and vaulted into her arms. He inspected her ears for treats, peered over
her shoulders at the boys.
“You tell us, Chistery boy, is Auntie Witch really magic?” said Npr. “Tell us all about Auntie
Witch.”
“Watch Witch,” said Chistery, playing with his fingers. “Which wretch which?” They could
have sworn it was a question, the way his forehead wrinkled like eyebrows.
lire you unaer a spell?” saia Manek.
“Spell ill. Spoil spell,” answered Chistery. “Spill all.”
“How do we spoil the spell? How do we turn you back to a boy?” asked Irji, the oldest but just
as caught up as the others. “Is there a special way?”
“Why way?” said Chistery. “We woo, we weigh woe. Why?”
“Tell us what to do,” said Nor, petting him.
“Do, die,” said Chistery.
“Great,” said Irji. “So we can’t break the spell you’re under?”
“Oh, he’s only babbling,” Elphaba said from the doorway. “Look, I have visitors I didn’t even
invite.”
“Oh hello, Auntie,” they said. They knew they shouldn’t be there. “He’s talking, sort of. He’s
magicked.”
“He mostly just repeats what you say,” said Elphaba, moving closer. “So leave him alone.
You’re not allowed here.”
They said, “Sorry,” and left. Back in the boys’ room, they fell on the mattress and roared until
they wept, and couldn’t say what was so funny. Maybe it was the relief of having escaped without
harm from the Witch’s rooms, even though they had no business there. The children decided they
were no longer scared of Auntie Witch.
ey were tired of being housebound, but finally it was raining out
instead of snowing. They played hide-and-seek a lot, waiting for the rain to lift so they could go
outside.
One morning, Nor was it. She kept finding Manek easily, because Liir always hid near him and

gave him away. Manek lost his patience. “I always get caught, because you’re so hopeless. Why
can’t you hide well?”

“I can’t hide in the well,” Liir said, misunderstanding.
“Oh yes you can,” Manek said, delighted.
The next round began, and Manek led Liir right down the basement steps. The basement was
even damper than usual, with the groundwater seeping through the foundation stones. When they
swiveled the lid off the fishwell, they could see the water level had risen. But it was still a good
twelve or fourteen feet down.
“This’ll just be fine,” Manek said, “look, if we loop the rope over this hook, the bucket will
hold steady enough for you to climb in it. Then when I let the crank out, the bucket will slowly slide
down the side of the well. I’ll stop it before it gets to the water, don’t worry. Then I’ll put the lid on
and Nor will look and look! She’ll never find you.”
Liir peered into the clammy shaft. “What if there are spiders?”
“Spiders hate water,” said Manek authoritatively. “Don’t worry about spiders.”
“Why don’t you do it?” said Liir.
“You’re not strong enough to lower me, that’s why,” said Manek patiently.
“Don’t hide far away,” said Lift. “Don’t let me down too far. Don’t push the cover on all the
way, I don’t like the dark.”
“You’re always complaining,” Manek said, giving him a hand. “That’s why we don’t like you,
you know.”
“Well, everybody’s mean to me,” Liir said.
“Crouch down now. Hold on to the ropes with both hands. If the bucket scrapes against the wall
a little bit just push yourself away. I’ll let it down slowly.”
“Where are you going to hide?” Liir said. “There isn’t anyplace else in this room.”
“I’ll hide under the stairs. She’ll never find me in the shadows, she hates spidcrs.”
“I thought you said there weren’t any spiders!”
“She thinks there are,” Manek said. “One two three. This is really a good idea, Liir. You’re so
brave.” He grunted with the effort. Liir was heavier in the bucket than he had figured, and the rope
spooled too quickly. It jammed in the joint between the windlass and the struts, and the bucket
stopped and smashed against the wall with an echoing thud.
“That was too fast,” came Liir’s voice, ghostly in the gloom.
“Oh, don’t be a sissy,” Manek said. “Now shhh, I’m going to pivot the cover back on partway,
so she won’t guess. Don’t make any noise.”
“I think there’s fish down here.”
“Of course there are, it’s a fishwell.”
“Well, I’m awfully near the water. Do they jump?”
“Yes they jump, and they have sharp teeth, you ninny, and they like
fat little boys,” said Manek. “Of course they don’t jump. Would I put you in danger like that if
they did? Honestly, you don’t trust me at all, do you?” He sighed, as if disappointed beyond words,
and when the cover slid all the way on instead of part way, he noted without surprise that Liir was
too hurt to complain.
Manek hid under the stairs for a little while. When Nor didn’t come down he decided that
behind the altar skirts of the old musty chapel would be an even better hiding place. “Be right back,
Liir,” he hissed, but since Liir didn’t answer Manek guessed he was still nursing his grievances.
Sarima was taking a rare turn in the kitchen, concocting a stew out of limp vegetables from the
keeping room. The sisters were having a dance recital amongst themselves in the music room
overhead. “Sounds like a herd of elephants,” Sarima said, when Auntie Guest came wandering
through, looking for something to snack on.
“I didn’t expect to see you here,” said Elphaba. “You know, I have a complaint to lodge against

your children.”
“The sweet little vandals, what now,” Sarima said, stirring. “Have they been putting spiders in
your bedsheets again?”
“I wouldn’t mind spiders. At least the crows could eat them. No, Sarima, the children rifle
through my belongings, they tease Chistery unmercifully, and they will not listen when I talk to them.
Can’t you do anything with them?”
“What’s to be done?” said Sarima. “Here, taste this rutabaga, is it gone to the dogs?”
“Even Killyjoy wouldn’t touch this,” decided Elphie. “You better stick with the carrots. I think
those children are ungovernable, Sarima. Oughtn’t they be off to school?”
“Oh yes, in a better life they would be, but how can they?” said their mother placidly. “I’ve
already told you that they’re sitting targets for ambitious Aijiki tribesmen. It’s bad enough even to let
them run around on the slopes near Kiamo Ko in the summer, I never know when they’re going to be
found, trussed, and bled like a pig, and brought home for burying. It’s the cost of widowhood,
Auntie; we must do the best we can.”
“I was a good child,” Elphie said stoutly. “I took care of my little sis
ter, who was horribly disfigured from birth: I obeyed my father, and my mother until she died. I
tramped around as a missionary child and gave testimonials to the Unnamed God even though I was
essentially faithless. I believed in obedience, and I don’t believe it hurt me.”
“Then what did hurt you?” asked Sarima wittily.
“You won’t listen,” said Elphie, “so I won’t even say. But for whatever reasons, your children
are ungovernable. I disapprove of your lax ways.”
“Oh, children are good at heart,” Sarima said, intent on scraping carrots. “They are so innocent
and gay. It cheers me up to see them dashing about the house in this game or that. All too soon these
precious days will be past, dear Auntie, and then we will look back on when this house was filled
with peals of childish laughter.”
“Fiendish laughter.”
“There is something inherently good about children,” said Sarima decidedly, warming to the
subject. “You know that little Ozma, who all those years ago was deposed by the Wizard? They say
that she is off someplace, frozen in a cave-perhaps even in the Kells, for all I know. She’s preserved
in her childhood innocence because the Wizard hasn’t the courage to kill her. One day she’ll come
back to rule Oz, and she’ll be the best and wisest sovereign we ever had, because of the wisdom of
youth.”
“I’ve never believed in child saviors,” Elphaba said. ‘As far as I’m concerned, children are the
ones who need saving.”
“You’re just cross because the children have such high spirits.”
“Your children are evil sprites,” Elphie said, in a snit.
“My children aren’t evil, nor were my sisters and I evil children.”
“Your children aren’t good,” said Elphie.
“Well, how do you judge Liir in this regard, then?”
“Oh, Liir,” Elphie said, and made an expression, and said pfaaaah, with her tongue and hands.
Sarima was about to pursue this-a matter she had long been curious about-when Three came rushing
into the kitchen.
“The passes below us must have melted sooner than usual,” she said, “for we have sighted a
caravan struggling its way over the Locklimb Trail, coming from the north! It’ll be here by
tomorrow!”
It was lunchtime when the skarks and the wagon began the final, difficult ascent up the slope to
the castle portcullis and the gates of jasper and oak. The townspeople came out from their hovels and

leaned their weight against the carriage, helping it through the ruts of mud and ice, until at last it
turned in and crossed the open drawbridge. Elphaba, her curiosity as piqued as anyone else’s, stood
with the Dowager Princess of the Aijikis and her sisters on a parapet above the crudely carved front
doorway. The children waited in the cobblestoned yard below, all but Liir.
The leader, a grizzed young man, made the faintest mountain obeisance to Sarima. The skarks
defecated sloppily on the cobbles, to the delight of the children, who had never seen skark fewmets
before. Then
“Oh, rapture,” Sarima said, “and the castle such a mess! This always happens. Why don’t we
learn? Quick, call the children and we’ll have to organize a scrub and polish. You never know,
Auntie, it could be an honored guest. You have to be prepared.”
Manek and Nor and liji came running from their game. Three told them the news, and they
immediately had to dash up the highest tower to see what they could see through the slackening rain,
and to wave aprons and handkerchiefs. Yes, there was a caravan, five or six skarks and a small
wagon, pulling through the snow and the mud, having trouble fording this stream, stopping to mend a
split wheel, stopping to feed the skarks! It was a wonderful treat, and all through the dinner meal of
vegetable soup the children chattered away at the surprises they might find among the passengers in
the caravan. “They’ve never stopped thinking their father is going to come back,” said Sarima under
her breath to Elphaba. “This excitement is a hope for him, though they don’t remember it.”
“Where is Liir?” asked Four, “it’s a perfect waste of good soup when he doesn’t show up on
time. He shan’t get any if he comes whining to me afterward. Children, where is Liir?”
“He was playing with us earlier. Maybe he fell asleep,” said Irji.
“Let’s go set a bonfire and smoke the travelers a hello,” said Manek, leaping from the table.
the leader went to the cabin and opened the door, and climbed inside. They could hear his
voice, raised loudly as if talking to someone hard of hearing.
They waited. The sky was a piercing blue, really almost a spring blue, and the icicles hung from
the eaves in dangerous daggers, melting like mad. The sisters all sucked in their stomachs, cursing
the extra piece of gingerbread, the honeyed cream in the coffee, vowing to do better. Please, sweet
Lurlina, let it be a i-nan.
The leader came out again, and proffered a hand, and he helped a figure alight from the cabin:
an old, creaky-limbed figure, in sad dark skirts and a hideously out-fashioned bonnet, even from the
provincial point of view.
But Elphaba was leaning forward, cleaving the air with her sharp chin and hatchet nose, and
sniffing like a beast. The visitor turned and the sun struck her face.
“Good glory,” breathed Elphie. “It’s my old Nanny!” And she left the parapet to run and gather
the old woman in her arms.
“Human feeling, will you look at that,” said Four, snify. “I wouldn’t have guessed her capable.”
For Auntie Guest was all but sobbing with pleasure.
The caravan leader wouldn’t stay for a meal, but Nanny with her valises and trunks clearly did
not intend to go any farther. She settled in a small musty room just below Elphaba’s, and took the
endless time it takes the elderly to make her toilet. By the time she was ready to be sociable, dinner
was served. A gamey old hen, more rope than flesh, lay in a thin pepper sauce on one of the good
salvers. The children were dressed in their best, and allowed this once to dine in the formal hall.
Nanny came in on the arm of Elphaba, and sat at her right hand. Because this was a visitor to Elphie,
the sisters had kindly put ElphIe’s napkin ring at the foot of the table, opposite Sanma-a place by
custom left vacant, in honor of poor dead Fiyero. It was a big mistake, and they would recognize it
almost immediately, as Elphaba never relinquished her advancement. But for now all was smiles and
savory hospitality. The only small annoyance (besides that Nanny wasn’t a young eligible princeling

looking for a bride) was that Liir still conducted his campaign of sullen disappearance. The children
didn’t know where he was.
Nanny was a tired and fruity old woman, skin cracked like dried soap, hair thin and yellowy
white, hands with veins as prominent as the cords around a good Aijiki goat cheese. She
communicated wheezily, with lots of pauses to breathe and think, that she had heard through someone
named Crope, in the Emerald City, that her old charge Elphaba had attended Tibbett in his last days
at the Cloister of Saint Glinda outside the Emerald City. No one in the family had heard from
Elphaba in years and years, and Nanny had decided to take it upon herself to find her. The maunts
were reluctant at first, but Nanny had persisted, and then she had waited until a new caravan was
ready to leave. The maunts had told her about Elphaba’s mission in Kiamo Ku, and Nanny had
booked passage the following spring. And here she was.
“And of the outside world?” asked Two eagerly. Let them catch up on family gossip on their
own time.
“What do you mean?” said Nanny.
“Politics, science, fashion, the arts, the driving edge!” said Two.
“Well, our redoubtable Wizard has crowned himself Emperor,” said Nanny. “Did you know
that?”
They hadn’t heard. “By whose authority?” asked Five, scoffing, “And furthermore, Emperor
over what?”
“There isn’t anyone who has any more authority, he said,” said Nanny calmly, “and who could
argue with that? He’s in the business of handing out honors annually as it is. He just tacked on an
extra one for himself. As for Emperor over what, I couldn’t say. Some people whisper that this
implies expansionist aims. But where he could expand to-I couldn’t say, I just couldn’t. Into the
desert? Beyond, to Quox, or Ix, or Fliaan?”
“Or does he mean to have a more tight-fisted hold on terrain he’s only loosely governed,” asked
Elphaba, “like the Vinkus?” She felt a chill, like an old wound deep beneath her breastbone.
“No one is particularly happy,” said Nanny. “There is an enforced conscription now, and the
Gale Force threatens to outnumber the Royal Army. One doesn’t know if there could be an internal
struggle for power, and the Wizard is preparing against an eventual takeover attempt. How can one
have an opinion about such things? Old and female as we are?” She smiled to include them all. The
sisters and Sarima glared as youthfully as they could back at her.
The next day hardly dawned at all, so gloomy with rain, so glowery with featureless clouds.
In the parlor, waiting for Nanny to emerge and continue her obligation of entertaining them, the
sisters and Sarima discussed what new facts they had learned about their Auntie Guest. “Elphaba,”
mused Two. “It’s a pretty enough name. Where does it come from?”
“I remember,” said Five, who had once gone through a faintly religious phase when she
realized marriage possibilities were growing dim. “I had a Lives of the Saints once. Saint Aelphaba
of the Waterfall-she was a Munchkinlander mystic, six or seven centuries ago. Don’t you remember?
She wanted to pray, but she was of such beauty that the local men kept pestering her for-attention.”
They all sighed, in chorus.
“To preserve her sanctity, she went into the wilderness with her holy scriptures and a single
bunch of grapes. Wild beasts threatened her, and wild men hunted after her, and she was sore
distressed. Then she came upon a huge waterfall coursing off a cliff. She said, ‘This is my cave,’ and
took off all her clothes, and she walked right through the screen of pounding water. Beyond was a
cavern hollowed out by the splashing water. She sat down there, and in the light that came through
the wall of water she read her holy book and pondered on spiritual matters. She ate a grape every
now and then. When at last she had finished her grapes, she emerged from the cave. Hundreds

ofyears had passed. There was a village built on the banks of the stream, and even a milldam nearby.
The villagers shrank in horror, for as children they had all played in the cavern behind the waterfalllovers had trysted there-murders and foul deeds had taken place there-treasure had been buried
there-and never had anyone ever seen Saint Aelphaba in her naked beauty. But all Saint Aelphaba
had to do was open her mouth and speak the old speech, and they all knew that it must be she, and
they built a chapel in her honor. She blessed the children and the elderly, and heard the confessions
of the middle-aged, and healed some sick and fed some hungry, that sort of stuff, and then
disappeared behind the waterfall again with another bunch of grapes. I think a bigger bunch this time.
And that’s the last anyone has seen of her.”
“So you can disappear and not be dead,” said Sarima, looking out the window a little dreamily,
past the rain.
“If you’re a saint,” said Two pointedly.
“If you even believe it,” said Elphaba, who had come into the parlor during the end of the
recitation. “The reemerging Saint Aelphaba might have been some hussy from the next town over
who wanted to give gullible peasants a good going over.”
“That’s doubt for you, it scours hope out of everything,” Sarima said dismissively. “Auntie, you
kill me sometimes, you really do.”
“I think it would be charming to call you Elphaba,” said Six, “because that is a charming story.
And it’s nice to hear your real name on Nanny’s lips.”
“Don’t you try it,” said Elphie. “If Nanny can’t help herselL so be it; she’s ancient and it’s hard
to change. But not you.”
Six pursed her lips as if to make an argument, but just then there was a clattering of feet from
downstairs, and Nor and Irji burst into the room.
“We found Liir!” they said. “Come on, we think he’s dead! He’s fallen in the fishwell!”
They all pounded down the stairs to the basement. Chistery had been the one to find him. The
snow monkey’s nose had wrinkled when he and the boys passed the fishwell, and he had whined,
and whimpered, and tugged at the weighted cover. Nor and Itji had had an idea to lower him down in
the bucket then, but when they swiveled the cover off, the lurid gleam of light on pale human flesh
had terrified them.
Manek came running when he heard the noise of his mother and the others exclaiming before the
well. They pulled Liir up. The water had risen, what with continued melting and the further rain. Liir
was like a corpse left in a stream, bloated. “Oh, is that where he was,” said Manek in a funny voice.
“You know he said he wanted to go down in that fishwell once.”
“Get away, children, you shouldn’t see this, go upstairs,” Sarima said, scolding. “Come on
now, behave, upstairs for you.” They didn’t know what they were looking at and they were afraid to
look too closely.
“I cannot believe it, this is so terrible,” said Manek excitedly, and Liphaba gave him a sharp,
hateful look.
“Obey your mother,” she snapped, and Manek made a nasty face, but he and Irji and Nor
clomped upstairs, and huddled around the open doorway at the top to listen, and peer.
“Oh, who has the art of medicine in their hands, have you, Auntie?” asked Sarima. “Quick now,
there may be time. You have the arts, don’t you, you studied the life sciences! What can you do?”
“liii, go get Nanny, tell her it’s an emergency,” shouted Elphie. “We’ll bring him up to the
kitchen, gently now. No, Sarima, I don’t know enough.”
“Use your spells, use your magic!” exclaimed Five.
“Bring him back,” urged Six, and Three added, “You can do it, don’t be hidden and shy about it
now!”

“I can’t bring him back,” said Elphaba, “I can’t! I have no aptitude for sorcery! I never did!
That was all a foolish campaign of Madame Morrible’s, which I rejected!” The six sisters looked at
her askance.
Irji escorted Nanny to the kitchen, Nor brought the broom, Manek brought the Grimmerie, and
the sisters and Sarima brought the body of Liir, dripping and bloated, and laid him on the butcher’s
block. “Oh, now who’s this one,” mused Nanny, but got to work pumping the legs and the arms, and
set Sarima to pressing in at the abdomen.
Elphaba flipped through the Grimmerie, she screwed up her face and hit herself on the temple
with her fists, and wailed, “But I have no personal experience with a soul-how can I find his if I
don’t know what one looks like?”
“He’s even fatter than usual,” said Irji.
“If you prick his eyes out with a magic straw from the magic broom, his soul will come back,”
said Manek.
“I wonder why he went in the fishwell?” said Nor. “I never would.”
“Holy Lurlina, mercy on us, mercy!” said Sarima, weeping, and the sisters began to mumble the
service of the dead, honoring the Unnamed God for the life departed.
“Nanny can’t do everything,” snapped Nanny, “Elphaba, be some help! You’re just like your
mother in a Crisis! Put your mouth on his and push air into his lungs! Go on!”
Elphaba wiped the wet off Liir’s pasty face with the edge of her sleeve. The face stayed where
it was pushed. She grimaced, and nearly
vomited, and spit something into a bucket, and then she sank her mouth down on the child’s, and
breathed out, pushing into the sour passage her own sour breath. Her fingers tensed at the sides of the
butcher’s block, gouging splinters, as if in an ecstasy of sexual tension. Chistery breathed along with
her, breath for breath.
“He smells like fish,” Nor said under her breath.
“If that’s what you look like when you drown, I’d rather burn to death,” said Iiji.
“I’m just not going to die,” Manek said, “and nobody can make me.”
The body of Liir began to choke. They thought at first it was an involuntary reaction, air from
Elphaba’s mouth pocketing and blurting out again, and then there was a small stream of yellowish
yuck. Then Liir’s eyelids moved, and his hand twitched of its own accord.
“Oh mercy,” Sarima murmured. “It’s a miracle. Thank you Lurlina! Bless you!”
“We’re not out of the woods yet,” said Nanny. “He may still die of exposure. Quick now, off
with his clothes.”
The children watched the silly indignity of grown-up women tearing stupid Liir’s trousers and
tunic off. They rubbed him all over with lard. This gave the children a case of the giggles, and made
liji feel very funny in his trousers, for the first time in his life. Then they wrapped Liir in a woolen
blanket, which made quite a mess, and prepared to put him to bed.
“Where does he sleep?” said Sarima.
They all looked at one another. The sisters looked at Elphaba, and Elphaba looked at the
children.
“Oh, sometimes on the floor in our room, sometimes on the floor in Nor’s,” said Manek
“He wants to sleep in my bed too but I push him out,” said Nor. “He’s too fat, there’d be no
room for me and my dollies.”
“He doesn’t even have a bed?” Sarima coldly asked Elphie.
“Well, don’t ask me, this is your house,” said Elphie.
And Liir stirred somewhat, and said, “The fish talked to me. I talked to the fish. The goldfish
talked to me. She said she was

“Hush, little one,” said Nanny, “time for that later.” She glared around at the women and
children in the kitchen. “Well, it shouldn’t take Nanny to have to find him a proper bed, but if there’s
none other
for him he can come up to my room, and I’ll sleep on the floor!”
“Of course not, the very idea,” began Sarima, bustling ahead. “Barbarians, the lot of you!”
snapped Nanny.
For which no one In Kiamo Ko ever forgave her.
Sarima lectured Auntie Guest severely for what had happened to Liir. Elphaba tried to say that
it was not her doing, it was not her fault. “It was some boys’ trick, some game, some dare,” she said.
Their accusations spent, they fell to talking about the differences between boys and girls.
Sarima told Auntie Guest what she knew of the boys’ initiation rite in the tribe. “They are taken
out in the grasslands, and left with nothing but a loincloth and a musical instrument. They are
required to call forth spirits and animals out of the night, to converse with them, to learn from them,
to soothe them if they need soothing, to fight them if they need fighting. The child who dies at night
clearly lacks the discretion to decide if its company needs fighting, or soothing. So it is correct that
he should die young and not burden the tribe with his foolishness.”
“What do the boys say of spirits who approach them?” asked Auntie Guest.
“Boys say very little, especially about the spirit world,” she answered. “Nonetheless, you pick
up what you pick up. And I think some of the spirits are very patient, very wearing, very obdurate.
The lore supposes there should be conflict, hostility, battle, but I wonder, in contact with spirits, if
what the boy needs is a good helping of cold anger.”
“Cold anger?”
“Oh yes, don’t you know that distinction? Tribal mothers always tell their children that there
are two kinds of anger: hot and cold. Boys and girls experience both, but as they grow up the angers
separate according to the sex. Boys need hot anger to survive. They need the inclination to fight, the
drive to sink the knife into the flesh, the energy and initiative of fury. It’s a requirement of hunting, of
defense, of pride. Maybe of sex, too.”
“Yes, I know,” said Elphaba, remembering.
Sarima blushed and looked unhappy, and continued. “And girls need cold anger. They need the
cold simmer, the ceaseless grudge, the talent to avoid forgiveness, the sidestepping of compromise.
They need to
know when they say something that they will never back down, ever, ever. It’s the
compensation for a more limited scope in the world. Cross a man and you struggle, one of you wins,
you adjust and go on-or you lie there dead. Cross a woman and the universe is changed, once again,
for cold anger requires an eternal vigilance in all matters of slight and offense.” She glared at
Elphaba, pinning her with unspoken accusations about Fiyero, about Liir.
Elphaba thought about this. She thought about hot anger and cold anger, and if it divided by the
sexes, and which she felt, if either, if ever. She thought about her mother dying young, and her father
with his obsessions. She thought about the anger that Doctor Dillamond had had-an anger that drove
him to study and research. She thought about the anger that Madame Morrible could barely disguise,
as she tried to seduce the college girls into the secret service of government.
She sat and thought about it the following morning as she watched the strengthening sun beat
down on the mounds of snow on the sloping tiled roofs below. She watched the sun bleed ice water
out of the icicle. Warm and cold working together to make an icicle. Warm and cold anger working
together to make a fury, a fury worthy enough to use as a weapon against the old things that still
needed fighting.
In a fashion-without any way to confirm It, of course-she had always felt as capable of hot

anger as any man. But to be successful, one would need access to both sorts. .
Lift survived, but Manek did not. The icicle that Elphaba trained her gaze on, thinking on the
weapons one needed to fight such abuse-it broke like a lance from the eaves, and drove whistling
downward, and caught him in the skull as he went out to find some new way of beleaguering Liir.
They’re calling you a witch, do you know that?” said Nanny. “Now why ever is that?”
“Silliness and stupidity,” said Flphaba. “When I arrived I was distanced from my name, after
my years at the mauntery, where I was called Sister Saint Aelphaba. Elphaba seemed like the name
of someone long ago. I told them to call rue Auntie. Though I never felt like anyone’s Auntie, nor
would I know what it felt like. I never had any aunts or uncles.”
“Hmmm,” said Nanny, “I don’t think you’re much of a witch. Your mother would be
scandalized, bless her soul. Your father too.”
They were walking in the apple orchard. A cloud of blossoms thickened the air with scent. The
Witch’s bees were having a field day, humming throatily. Killyjoy sat wagging his tail in the shadow
of Manek’s tombstone, placed near the wall. The crows had relay races overhead, scaring away all
other birds except the eagles. Irji and Nor and Liir, at Nanny’s insistence, had been taken into the
schoolroom of the village. Kiamo Ko was blissfully quiet until midday.
Nanny was seventy-eight. She walked with a cane. She hadn’t given up on her little efforts
toward beauty, though now they seemed to coarsen rather than dignify her. Her powder was on too
thick, her lip rouge smeared and off center, and the flimsy lace shawl was useless in the updraft from
the valley. For her part, Nanny thought that Elphaba was looking poorly, as if she were going moldy
from the inside out. Pale. A disintegration of sorts. Elphaba didn’t seem to care for her beautiful hair
at all, keeping it knotted up out of sight underneath that ridiculous hat. And the black gown needed a
good washing and airing.
They stopped at a lopsided wall, and leaned against it. The sisters were gathering flowers a
few fields away, and Sarima ballooned along. In her dark mourning gown she resembled a huge
dangerous cocoon broken loose from its mooring. It was good to hear her laugh again, even if
falsely; light had that strange, ameliorative effect on everybody, even Elphaba.
Nanny had told Elphie about her family. The Eminent Thropp had died at last. In Elphaba’s
absence and presumed death, the mantle of Eminence had fallen to Nessarose. So the younger sister
was now ensconced in Colwen Grounds, issuing dogmatIc statements about faith and blame. Frex
was there with her too, his career of ministry almost at an end. As he gave up the effort his mind was
returning to balance. Shell? He came and went. Rumors abounded that he was an agitator for
Munchkinland’s secession from Oz. He had grown up handsome and fine, in Nanny’s biased opinion:
straight of limb, clear of skin, direct of speech, bold of heart. He was now in his early twenties.
“And what does Nessarose think of secession?” Elphie had asked. “Her opinion about it will
be important if she’s the Eminent Thropp now.”
Nanny reported that Nessarose had grown to be far cleverer than anyone anticipated. She kept
her cards close to her chest and issued vague statements about the revolutionary cause, statements
that could be read several ways, depending on the audience. Nanny assumed Nessarose intended to
set up some sort of theocracy, incorporating into the governing laws of Munchkinland her own
restrictive interpretation of unionism. “Your sainted father Frex himself doesn’t know if this would
be a good or bad thing, and keeps silent on the matter. He’s not much for politics, he prefers the
mystical realm.” There was, Nanny observed, even some local support for Nessarose’s plans. But
since Nessarose governed her remarks well, the Wizard’s armed forces garrisoned in the area could
find no excuse to arrest her. “She’s adept at this,” Nanny admitted. “Shiz taught her well. She stands
on her own two feet now.”
The word adept sent chills down Elphie’s spine. Was Nessarose even now responding to some

sort of spell that Madame Morrible had placed on her, those foggy years ago in the parlor at Crage
Hall? Was she in fact a pawn, an Adept of the Wizard, or of Madame Morrible? Did she know why
she did what she did? For that matter, was Elphaba herself merely a playing piece of a higher, evil
power?
The recollection of Madame Morrible’s proposals for their careers-hers, and Nessarose’s, and
Glinda’s-had come back to Elphie with a shock following the recovery of Liir from his saturation
and near drowning last winter. When he finally came around enough to answer questions about how
he had come to be in the fishwell, he could only say “The fish talked to me, she told me to come
down.” Elphie knew in her heart that it was Manek, horrible evil Manek, who had tortured the boy
unmercifully and openly all winter. She didn’t care that Manek died, even if Manek was the precious
son of Fiyero. Any torturer was fair game for javelin icicles. But she had to pause, gulping, at what
Liir had said next. He said, “The fish told me she was magic. She said that Fiyero was my father, and
that Iiji and Manek and Nor are my brothers and my sister.”
“Goldfish don’t talk, sweetheart!” Sarlma said. “You’re imagining things. You were down there
too long and your brain got waterlogged.”
Elphaba had yearned toward Liir, a strange, unhappy compulsion. Who was this boy who lived
in her life? Oh, she knew more or less where he came from, but who he was-it seemed to make a
difference, for the first time in her life. She had reached out and put her hand on his shoulder. He had
twitched it off; he was not used to such a gesture. And she had felt rebuffed.
“Want to see my pet mouse, Lift?” said Nor, who had been warm to the boy during his
convalescence. Lift always chose the company of his peers over questioning by the grown-ups, and it
was impossible to pry further information out of him about his ordeal. He didn’t seem much changed,
except that with Manek dead, Liir charged around Kiamo Ko with greater zest and liberty.
And Sarima had looked at Elphaba, and Elphaba thought the hour of her liberation was at hand
at last. “How silly of the boy, he’s delusional,” Sarima had said at last. “The idea of Fiyero being
his father. Fiyero didn’t have an ounce of fat on his body, and look at the boy.”
Under the terms of her welcome, Elphaba could not prod Sarima to change her mind, but she
stared at her hostess, willing her to accept the facts. But she wouldn’t. “And whoever might the
mother be?” said Sarima blandly, touching the hem of her skirt softly. “It’s preposterous beyond
words.”
For the first time, Elphie wished that Liir had at least an undertone of green in his skin.
Sarima had swept away, to weep in her chapel for her husband, for her second son.
And the terms of Elphie’s imprisonment-as an unwilling traitor, as an exiled maunt, as a hapless
mother, as a failed insurrectionist, as a Witch in disguise-remained unchanged.
Though the idea of a Goldfish or a Carp in the fishwell telling such things to LAir-was there any
possibility in that? Or had Madame Morrible the ability to change her shape, to live in cold
darkness, to slip in and observe what Elphie was up to? Liir had no imaginatIon to speak of, he
couldn’t have come up with that by himself. Could he?
When she went to look in the fishwell, many times at all hours of the day or night, the old carpor Carp-stayed out of sight.
“I’m glad to hear Nessarose is on her two feet,” said Elphaba at last, coming back to the
orchard from her musings. Nanny was gnawing at a piece of sugar candy.
“I mean that literally, you know,” said Nanny through her spittle. “She doesn’t need to be
propped up anymore. Not figuratively or literally. She can stand on her own, stand and sit.”
“Without benefit of arms? I don’t believe it,” said the Witch.
“You’ll have to. Do you remember that pair of shoes that Frex had decorated for her?”
Of course Elphaba remembered! The beautiful shoes! Her father’s sign of devotion to his

second daughter, his desire to accentuate her beauty and draw attention away from her deformity.
“Well, old Glirida of the Arduennas, remember her? Married to Sir Chuifrey, and gone a bit to
seed, in my humble opinion. She came to Colwen Grounds a couple of years ago. She and Nessarose
had a wild old time, remembering college days. And she put those very same shoes through
something of an enchantment. Don’t ask me. Magic was never my cup of tea. The shoes allowed
Nessarose to sit and stand and walk without support. She is never without them. She claims they give
her moral virtue too, but then she has buckets more of that than she needs. You’d be surprised how
superstitious Munchkinlanders have become these days.” Nanny sighed. “That’s why I was free to
look you up, deane.
The magic shoes made me redundant. Nanny is out of a job.”
“You’re too old to work, you sit and enjoy the sun,” said Elphaba. “You can stay here as long
as you like.”
“You talk as if this is your house,” said Nanny. “As if you have the right to issue such
invitations.”
“Until I’m allowed to leave, this is my house,” said Elphie. “I can’t help it.”
Nanny shaded her eyes and looked out over the mountains, which in the midday light looked
like polished horn. “It’s too rich, to think of you being a Witch, after a fashion anyway, and your
sister trying out as resident Saint. Who would have thought, back in those muddy years in the
Quadling badlands? I don’t think you’re a Witch, whatever you say. But one thing I do want to know.
Is Liir your son?”
Elphaba shivered, though her heart, deep inside its pocket of cold, roiled in hot energy. “It is
not a question I can answer,” she said sadly.
“You needn’t keep anything from me, deane. Remember, Nanny was nursemaid to your mother
too, and a more outgoing, sensual woman I have yet to meet. Convention didn’t bind her, not in youth
nor in married life.”
“I don’t think I want to hear about this,” said Elphie.
“Then let’s talk about Liir. What in blazes can you mean, you can’t answer a simple question
like that? Either you conceived him and bore him, or you didn’t. As far as I know in this world there
are no other stories.”
“What I mean,” said Elphaba “and the only remark about it I will ever make is this. When I first
went to the mauntery, under the kind offices of Mother Yackle, I was in no state to know what was
happening to me, and I spent about a year in a deathly sleep. It’s just possible I brought a child to
term and delivered it. I was another full year recovering. When I was first assigned duties, I worked
with the sick and the dying, and also with abandoned children. I had no more congress with LAir
than with any other of several dozen brats. When I left the mauntery to come here, it was under the
condition that I would take Liir with me. I didn’t question the instruction-one doesn’t question the
instructions of superiors. I have no motherly warmth toward the boy”-she gulped, in case this was no
longer true-“and I don’t feel as if I’ve ever gone through the experience of bearing a child. I don’t
quite believe myself
capable, in fact, although I’m willing to concede that this may be simply ignorance and
blindness. But that’s all there is to say about it. I’ll say no more, and no more will you.”
“Have you an obligation to be motherly to him then, despite the mystery?”
“The only other obligations I’m under are the ones I assign to myself And that, Nanny, is that.”
“You arc too tart, this situation makes you unhappy. But if you think I came here to raise yet
another generation of Thropps, forget it. Nanny is in her senility now, remember, and happily so.”
But Elphaba couldn’t help noting that in the weeks that followed, Nanny began to attend to
Liir’s needs more lovingly than she did the needs of Nor and Irji. Liphaba registered it with shame,

for she also saw how willingly Lift responded to Nanny’s attention.
In telling tales of Shell’s derring-do-her racy old heart pitter-pattering almost visibly beneath
her breastbone-Nanny revealed details of the Wizard’s campaigns. It made Elphaba furious, for she
had kept hoping to lose interest in the ways of evil men.
Nanny buzzed on about the Wizard’s having mounted a new kind of youth camp, the Emperor’s
Garden-a pretty, euphemistic name. All Munchkinlander children from four to ten were required to
attend, in month-long summer residencies. The children were sworn to secrecy-a great game for
them, no doubt. Nanny told a long-winded tale, more suited to toothless cronies in a fireside
inglenook than to a dinner table with upright and repressed Arjiki spinsters, of how Shell, dear
stranger brother Shell, disguised himself as a potato man doing deliveries. And got in the gates. Oh
la, the many amusing adventures of a rake! The Camp General’s nubile daughter in deshabille,
Shell’s inventive alibis, his dalliances, his narrow escapes! Almost being discovered at his liaisonsby children! What a lark! Nanny remained a mouthy old peasant at heart despite her airs. Elphaba
thought: She hardly comprehends she is talking about indoctrination, betrayal, forced conscription of
children into lowlevel warfare. With Elphie’s newfound awareness of Liir hovering at the edges of
her life, bumbling gently through her days, she found these tales of indoctrinated children horrifying
and repugnant.
She went to the Grimmerie and hauled open its massive cover- leather ornamented with golden
hasps and pins, and tooled with silver leaf-and pored through the tome to find what makes people
thirst for such authority and muscle. Is it the sheer nature of the beast within, the human animal inside
the Human Being?
She looked for a recipe for the overthrow of a regime. She found much on power, and damage,
but little on strategy.
The Grimmerie described poisoning the lips of goblets, charming the steps of a staircase to
buckle, agitating a monarch’s favorite lapdog to make a fatal bite in an unwelcome direction. It
suggested the nocturnal insertion, through any convenient orifice, of a fiendish invention, a thread
like a piano wire, part tapeworm and part burning fuse, for a particularly painful demise. All of this
seemed carnival sleight of hand to Elphaba. What was more interesting, in her reading, was a small
drawing she saw next to a section marked Evil Particulars. The drawing-done, if you would believe
gullible Sarima, in some world other than theirs-was a clever sketch of a broad-faced woman-fiend.
Written in an angular, bronchiating script with elegant tapering serfs, all around the illustration, were
the words YAKAL SNARLING. Liphaba looked again. She saw a creature part woman, part
grassland jackal, its jaws open, its hand-paw lifted to rip the heart out of a spiderweb. And the
creature reminded her of old Mother Yackle from the mauntery.
Conspiracy theories, as Sarima had said, seemed to bedevil her thinking. She turned the page.
Nothing in the Grimmerie on how to depose a tyrant-nothing useful. Armies of holy angels were
not answerable to her. Nothing there that described why men and women could turn out so horrible.
Or so wonderful-if that ever happened anymore.
In truth, the family was devastated over Manek’s death. There was an unspoken feeling, that
somehow Liir’s life had been saved at the expense of Manek’s. The sisters suffered from that most
dreadful of losses: the theft of the adult Manek from their lives. Their sad lot had been bearable all
these years because Manek was going to be the man
Fiyero had been, and maybe more. They realized in retrospect that they had expected Manek to
restore the fallen fortunes of Kiamo Ko.
Feckless liji had no more sense of destiny than a prairie dog. And Nor was a girl, more ffighty
and distractible than usual. So Sarima, behind her gestures of ecstatic acceptance of life (its joys, its
sorrows, its mysteries, as she was fond of elaborating), became more aloof Never close to her

sisters, she began to take her meals alone in the Solar.
Irji and Nor, who had enjoyed a sort of allegiance from time to time against the headstrong
malice of Manek, had less to bind them together now. Irji began to moon about in the old unionist
chapel, teaching himself to read better by scrutinizing moldy hymnals and breviaries. Nor didn’t like
the chapel-she thought the ghost of Manek lingered there, as that was the last place she had seen his
body in the unwrapped shroud-so she tried to ingratiate herself with Auntie Witch-but to no avail.
“You are out to make mischief with Chistery,” snapped Elphie, “and I’ve work to do. Go bother
someone else.” She aimed a kick at Nor, who, whimpering and screaming as if it had hit home, left in
a funk.
Nor took to wandering-now that the summer was coming in- down the high valley, the one with
the stream at its bottom-and up the other side, where the sheep were nibbling on the best grass they
would get all year. In previous years she would either have been with her brothers, or she would
have been forbidden to go climbing alone. This year no one was paying enough attention to her to
forbid it. She wouldn’t have minded being forbidden, she wouldn’t have minded the strap even. She
was lonely.
One day she wandered particularly far down the valley, luxuriating in the strength and
endurance of her strong legs. She was only ten, but a strapping, mature ten. She had hiked her green
skirt up into her belt, and because the sun was high and strong, she had shucked off her blouse and
tied it like a bandanna around her head. She hardly had a swelling here or there on her chest with
which to startle any sheep, and anyway she expected to be able to spot a shepherd from miles away.
How in the world did I come to be here, of all places in Oz, she asked herself, freshly treading
upon the terrain of reflection. Here I am, a girl on a mountain, nothing but wind and sheep and grass
like an emerald brushfire, green and golden as Lurlinemas decorations, silky in the updraft, coarse in
the downdraft. Just me and the sun and the wind. And
that group of soldiers coming out from behind the rock.
She slid down onto her back in the grass, fixed up her blouse, and raised herself to her elbows,
hiding.
They were not soldiers such as she had seen before. They were not Arjiki men in their
ceremonial brasses and helmets, with theft spears and shields. These were men in brown uniforms
and caps, with muskets or something slung over their shoulders. They were wearing a kind of boot
rather high and inappropriate for hill walking, and when one of them had stopped and was fiddling
with a nail or a stone in his boot, his arm dis appeared inside it right up to his elbow.
There was a green stripe down the front of their uniforms, and a bar across it, and Nor felt cold
with an unfamiliar sense of anticipation. At the same time she wanted to be seen. What would Manek
have done? she asked herself. Irji would run, Liir would puzzle and dither, but Manek? Manek
would have marched right up to them and found out what was going on.
And so would she. She checked once again to make sure her buttons were done up, and then she
strode down the slope toward them. By the time she had got all their attention, and the man with the
boot off had slipped It back on, she was beginning to rethink the wisdom of the plan. But it was too
late to run away now.
“Hail,” she said in a formal way, using the language of the east, not her own AijikI vernacular.
“Hail, and halt. I am the Princess Daughter of the Arjikis, and this is my valley you are marching
your big black boots along.”
It was broad noon when she delivered them into the castle keep of Kiamo Ko. The sisters were
in their summer laundry yard, beating carpets themselves because they didn’t trust the local
scrubwives to treat them respectfully enough. The sound of boots on cobbles brought the sisters
running through an archway, all flushed and dusty, hair wrapped in cotton scarves. Elphaba heard the

noise, too, and threw her window open and stared. “Not an inch farther until I come down,” she
called, “or I’ll turn you all to rodents. Nor, come away from them. All of you, come away.”
“I shall fetch the Dowager Princess,” said Two, “if it please you gentiemen.”
But by the time Sarima arrived, drowsy from a nap, Elphaba had
descended, her broom over her shoulder, her eyebrows up to her scalp. “You have no invitation
here,” said Elphie, looking more like a Witch than ever in her mauntish skirts, “so just how welcome
would you like to be made? Who is in charge here? You? Who’s the senior one leads this mission?
You?”
“If you please, Madame,” said someone, a strapping Gillikinese man of about thirty. “I am the
Commander-the name is Cherrystone-and I’m under the Emperor’s orders to requisition a house
large enough to shelter our party while we are in this district of the Kells. We are doing a survey of
the passes to the Thousand Year Grasslands.” He produced a sweat-stained document from inside
his shirt.
“I found them, Auntie Witch,” said Nor proudly.
“Go away. Go inside,” said Elphaba to the girl. “You men aren’t welcome here and the girl has
no right to invite you. Turn around and march yourself out over that drawbridge at once.” Nor’s face
fell.
“This is not a request, it is an order,” said Commander Cherrystone in an apologetic tone.
“This isn’t a suggestion, it’s a warning,” said Elphaba. “Go, or suffer the consequences.”
Sarima by now had taken in enough to step forward, her sisters buzzing in a thrill around her.
“Auntie Guest,” she said, “you forget the code of the mountains, the same code by which you came to
lodge here, and your old Nanny after you. We do not turn visitors away. Please, sirs, excuse our
excitable friend. And excuse us. It has been some time since we saw soldiers in uniform.”
The sisters were primping away as best they could at such short notice.
“I won’t have it, Sarima,” Elphaba said, “you’ve never been out of here, you don’t know who
these men are or what they will do! I won’t have it, do you hear?”
“It’s the high spirits, the determination, it makes her so much fun to have around,” said Sarima a
trifle meanly, as in general she really did enjoy Elphaba’s company. But she did not like having her
authority usurped. “Gentlemen, this way. I’ll show you where you can wash up.”
Irji wasn’t sure what to make of military men, and wouldn’t go very near. Whether he was
afraid of being conscripted or enchanted he couldn’t say.
He dragged a sleeping roll down into the chapel and slept there, now that it was warm enough.
It was Nanny’s opinion he was going weird. “Believe me, after a life looking after your dear
mother’s devout husband, Frex, and your sister after that, I know a religious lunatic when I see one,”
she said to Elphaba. “That boy ought to be taking some lessons from these men in manliness,
whatever else is going on here.”
On the other hand, Liir was in heaven. He followed Commander Cherrystone around unless he
was turned back, and he fetched water for the men and polished their boots, in a surfeit of illconcealed romance. The tramping they did, reconnoitering about the local valleys, mapping the
places to ford the river, pinpointing spots for beacons, gave Liir more exercise and fresh air than he
had ever had before. His spine, which had threatened to become curved like the arc of a mountain
harp, seemed to straighten out. The soldiers were indifferent to him, but they were not manifestly
unkind, and LAir took this as approval and fondness.
The sisters regained some sense when they stopped to consider what class of men would go
into the army. But it wasn’t easy.
Sarima alone seemed unperturbed by the disturbance to theft routine. She cast about among the
villagers and called in favors to help her feed the host of soldiers, and in mixed resentment and fear

her neighbors came up with milk, eggs, cheese, and vegetables. There was stouch or garmot from the
fishwell almost every evening. And the summer game, of course- quail, bill pfenix, baby roe-which
the men proved a dab hand at bringing in themselves. Nanny suspected that the reconnaissance team
was helping Sarima over her grief, bringing her back to the family table at least.
But Elphaba was furious at them all. She and the Commander had words every day. Elphie
forbade him to allow Liir to tag along-and she forbade Liir himself-to absolutely no effect. Her first
true motherly feelings were of incompetence and of being blithely ignored as inconsequential. She
could not understand how the human race had ever managed to develop past a single generation. She
continually wanted to strangle Liir, as a means of saving him from smooth-talking father figures.
As Elphie tried harder to ferret out the nature of his mission, with every sidestepping pleasantry
Commander Cherrystone grew more icy and polite. The one thing Elphaba had never been able to
manage was a parlor manner, and this soldier-of all people-was a master at it. It
made her feel as she had felt among the society girls at Crage Hall. “Pay those soldiers no
mind, they’ll go away eventually,” said Nanny, who was at the time of her life when everything was
either the final fatal crisis or a dismissible matter indeed.
“Sarima says that she has rarely seen any of the Wizard’s forces in the Vinkus. This was always
arid, lifeless, of little interest to the farmers and merchants of northern and eastern Oz. The tribes
have lived here for decades, centuries I suppose, with nothing but the occasional cartographer
passing through and beating a quick retreat. Don’t you think this suggests some sort of campaign in
these parts? What else can it suggest?”
“Look at how long it has taken these young men to recuperate from their overland trek,” said
Nanny. “This is surely just a reconnaissance mission, as they say. They’ll get their information and
then leave. Besides, everyone is always telling me, the whole damn place is swamped in snow or
mud for two thirds of the year. You’re a worrier, you always were. The way you gripped the
Quadlings we used to proselytize, as if they were your own private dolls! How you went on when
they were relocated or whatever! It used to trouble your mother no end, believe me.”
“It’s been well documented that the Quadlings were being exterminated, and we were
witnesses,” said Elphaba strictly. “You too, Nanny.”
“I look after my young, I can’t look after the world,” said Nanny, quaffing a cup of tea and
scratching Killyjoy’s nose. “I look after Liir, which is more than you do.”
Elphaba didn’t think it worth her while to lambaste the old biddy. She ffipped through the
Gnmmerie again, trying to find some small spell of binding with which she could close the castle
gates against the men. She wished she had at least sat in on Miss Greyling’s class in magic at school.
“Of course your mother was worried about you, she always was,” said Nanny. “You were such
an odd little thing. And the trials that poor woman had! You remind me of her now, only you’re more
rigid than she was. She could really let her hair down. Do you know, she was so upset with having
you be a girl-she was so convinced you’d be a boy-she sent me to the Emerald City to find an elixir
to ensure But Nanny stopped, muddled. “Or was that elixir to prevent her next child from being born
green? Yes, that was it.”
“Why did she want me to be a boy?” said Elphaba. “I would have
obliged her if I’d had a say in the matter. Not to be simplistic, but it always made me feel
horrible, to know how I’d disappointed her so early on. Not to mention the looks.”
“Oh, don’t credit her with nasty motives,” said Nanny. She eased her shoes off and rubbed the
backs of her feet with her cane. “Melena had hated her life at Colwen Grounds, you know. That’s
why she contrived to fall in love with Frex and get out of there. Her grandfather the Eminent Thropp
had made it all too clear that she would inherit the title. The Munchkinlander title descends through
the female line unless there are no daughters. The family seat, and all its attendant responsibilities,

would go from him, to Lady Partra, to Melena, and then to the first daughter Melena had. She was
hoping to have only sons, to keep them out of that place.”
“She always talked about it so lovingly!” said Elphaba, astounded.
“Oh, everything is gorgeous once it’s gone. But for a young person, trained up in all that wealth
and responsibility-well, she hated it. She revolted by having sex early and often, with anyone who
would oblige, and she as good as ran off with Frex, who was the first suitor she had who loved her
for herself and not her position and inheritance. She thought a daughter of hers would find it equally
deadly, so she wanted sons.”
“But that makes no sense. If she had sons and no daughters, then her oldest son would inherit. If
I’d been a boy without sisters, I’d still have been stuck in the same mess.”
“Not necessarily,” said Nanny. “Your mother had one older sister, who was born with a
permanent case of overwrought nerves, maybe also lacking in the brains department. She was housed
off-grounds. But she was old enough to breed, and healthy enough, and was just as likely to bear a
daughter. If she had borne a daughter first, her daughter would have inherited the title of Eminence,
and the estate and fortunes with it.”
“So I have a mad aunt,” said the Witch. “Maybe madness runs in the family. Where is she
now?”
“Died of the flu when you were still a small child, and left no issue. So Melena’s hopes were
dashed. But that was her thinking, back in those brash, brave days of youthful blunder.”
Elphaba had few memories of her mother, and they were warm, sometimes searing. “But what’s
this about her taking medicine to prevent Nessarose from being born green?”
“I got her some tablets in the Emerald City, from some gypsy woman,” said Nanny. “I explained
to the beastly creature what had happened-I mean that you’d been born an unfortunate color, and
those teeth-thank Lurline your second set were more human!-and the gypsy woman made some silly
prophecy about two sisters being instrumental in the history of Oz. She gave me some powerful pills.
I’ve always wondered if the pills were the cause of Nessarose’s affliction. I wouldn’t mess with
gypsy potions anymore, believe me. Not with what we know these days.” She smiled, having long
ago forgiven herself of any culpability in the whole affair.
“Nessarose’s affliction,” mused Elphaba. “Our mother took some gypsy remedy, and bore a
second daughter without arms. It was either green or armless. Mama didn’t have very good luck at
girls, did she.”
“Shell, however, is a sight for sore eyes,” said Nanny rosily. “Then, who is to say it was all
your mother’s fault? First there was the confusion about who was really Nessarose’s father, and then
the pills from that old Yacide person, and your father’s moodiness-“
“Yackle person? What do you mean?” asked Elphaba, starting. “And who the hell was
Nessarose’s father if it wasn’t Papa?”
“Oh la,” said Nanny, “pour me another cup of tea and I’ll tell you all. You’re old enough now,
and Melena’s long dead.” She meandered through a story about the Quadling glassblower named
Turtle Heart, and Melena’s uncertainty whether Nessarose was his child or Frex’s, and the visit to
Yackle, about whom she could remember nothing else but the name, the pills, and the prophecy, can’t
pull teeth from a hen so stop trying. She didn’t mention (and she never had) how depressed Melena
became when Elphaba was born. There was no point.
Elphie listened to all this, impatient and annoyed. On the one hand she wanted to throw it out
the window: The past was immaterial. On the other, things fell into a slightly different order now.
And that Yackle! Was the name just a coincidence? She was tempted to show Nanny the picture of
Yakal Snarling in the Grimmerie, but resisted. No sense alarming the old woman, or giving her the
nighttime frights.

So the two women poured each other tea and restrained themselves from painful observations
about the past. But Elphaba began to fret about Nessarose. Perhaps Nessie didn’t want the position
of Eminence, and was
just as incarcerated there as her older sister was here. Perhaps Elphaba owed her the chance of
liberty. Yet how much really could you owe other people? Was it endless?
Nor was beside herself. In a short time her whole life had changed, so utterly. The world was
more magic than ever, but it seemed lodged inside her now, not outside. Her body was waiting to
flame, to blossom, and no one seemed to care or to notice.
Liir had become a water boy for the expeditionary soldiers. Irji spent his time composing long
devotional libretti in honor of Lurlina. In a state of uncertainty over the men in residence, the sisters
remained confined to theft chambers by their own inclination, yet quivering with readiness should
things change. Nothing could change, as convention dictated, unless Sarima married again, and then
they would be free to court. Their domestic campaigns to throw Commander Cherrystone and Sarima
together, however, met with no success. They redoubled their efforts. Three even approached Auntie
Witch for a love potion from that magic encyclopedia. “Hah,” said Elphaba, “that’ll be the day,” and
that was that about that.
Nor, bereft of companionship, took to hanging around the men’s dormitory, trying to pitch in
with chores that Liir wasn’t asked to do, that men didn’t much care about. She hung out theft cloaks
in the sun. She polished their buttons. She brought them flowers from the hills. She prepared a tray of
summer fruits and cheeses that seemed to please them, especially when she served them herself One
young, dark, balding soldier with a captivating smile liked her to pop the orange segments right in his
lips, and he sucked the juice from her fingers, to the mingled enjoyment and envy of the others. “Sit
on my lap,” he said, “and let me feed you.” He offered her a strawberry, but she wouldn’t sit on his
lap-and she loved refusing.
One day she decided to treat them to a full-scale chamber cleaning. They were out doing an
inventory of the vineyards on the lower slopes and would be gone all day. Nor arrayed herself with
rags, yoked herself
with buckets, and since Auntie Witch was deep in conversation with Nanny about, it seemed,
Sarima, Nor swiped the Witch’s broom, for its thicker brush and longer handle. She headed to the
barracks.
She couldn’t read much, so she ignored the letters and maps that spilled from the leathern
satchels left carelessly slung over the back of a chair. She tidied the trunks, and swept, and in the
effort raised a lot of dust, and felt warm.
She took off her blouse, and slung one of the men’s rough capes over her sun-browned
shoulders. It gave off such a heady aroma of maleness, even after its airing, that she nearly swooned.
She lay down on someone’s pallet with the cape just slightly falling open, so that she could imagine
falling asleep and having the men return and see the beautiful line of flat skin that ran between her
fresh new breasts. She considered pretending to fall asleep. But she knew she wouldn’t do this. She
sat up, dissatisfied with the possibilities, and reached out to grab the nearest thing-it happened to be
the broom-so she could whack something in frustration.
The broom was out of reach, but it lunged a little toward her. It came across the floor of its own
accord. She saw it. The broom was magic.
She touched it, almost fearfully, as if she guessed it had intentions. It felt no different from an
ordinary broom. It merely moved, as if guided by the hand of an invisible spirit. “What tree are you
whittled from, what field are you mown from?” she asked it, almost tenderly, but she expected no
answer and she got none. The broom quivered, and elevated itself a little off the floor, as if waiting.
The cape had a hood on it, and she drew this up over her face. Then she hiked her summer skirt

to her knees, and threw one leg over the broom, to ride it as a child rides a hobby horse.
The thing rose, tentatively, so she could keep her balance by trailing her toes on the floor,
correcting, correcting-the center of gravity was high, and the span was so narrow. The top of the
handle tilted farther up, and she slid down the shaft until she was caught against the brush top, as if it
were a saddle of sorts. She held on tightly; her legs, especially in the upper thigh, felt as if they were
swelling, the better to clench the handle between them. The large window at the end of the room hung
open, for aft and light, and the broom moved a couple of feet across the floor, until it had reached the
sill.
Then the broom rose a few feet, and carried her out the window. Nor’s stomach pitched, and
her heels beat against the underside of the brush. Mercifully she had emerged not in the castle
courtyard, where she would likely be seen, but on the other side, where the land did not fall away
quite so far and fast. Nor wailed softly in the strangeness and ecstasy of the adventure. The cape
flared out, exposing her chest, and how could she ever have imagined she wanted to be seen without
a blouse? “Oh oh,” she cried, but whether to the broom or to some guardian spirit, she did not know.
She shuddered with exposure and shock, and the broom rose higher and higher, until it had come to a
level with the uppermost window, which was in the Witch’s tower.
The Witch and her nanny were watching, open-mouthed, with cups of tea halfway to their lips.
“You come down from there at once,” ordered the Witch. Nor didn’t know if it was she who
was being addressed, or the broom. She had no reins to tug, no words of magic to wield. However
the broom, apparently chastened, turned back, descended, and made a somewhat clumsy landing on
the floor of the men’s barracks. Nor flung herself off, weeping and shivering, and reclothed herself
properly. She didn’t want to touch the broom again, but when she picked it up the life had gone out of
it, and she carried it up to the Witch’s apartments expecting a severe reprimand.
“What were you doing with my broom?” barked the Witch.
“I was cleaning the soldiers’ quarters,” gabbled Nor. “It’s such a mess, their papers all over,
their clothes, their maps .
“Keep your hands off my things, you,” said the Witch. “What kinds of papers?”
“Plans, maps, letters, I don’t know,” said Nor, regaining her spunk, “go look for yourself. I
didn’t pay attention.”
The Witch took the broom and appeared to consider hitting Nor with it. “Don’t be a fool, Nor.
Stay away from those men,” she said coldly. “Stay away from them!” She raised the broom like a
truncheon.
“They’ll hurt you as soon as spit at you. Stay away from them, I say. And stay away from me!”
Elphaba remembered that the broom was given her by Mother Yackle. The young woman had
seen the old maunt as crippled, senile, a bother,
but now Elphaba looked back and wondered if there was more to her than met the eye. Was that
broom magicked by Mother Yackle, with a vestige of some Kumbricial instinct? Or did Nor have a
power developing in her, and did she bring it out in the senseless broom? Nor apparently was a
fervid believer in magic; maybe the broom was waiting to be believed in. Would it fly for Elphaba,
too?
One night when everyone else had retired, Elphaba brought the broom out to the courtyard. She
felt a little foolish, crouching down on the broom like a child on a hobbyhorse. “Come on, fly, you
fool thing,” she muttered. The broom twitched back and forth in a naughty way, enough to raise welts
in her inner thighs. “I’m not a blushing schoolgirl, stop that nonsense,” said Elphaba. The broom rose
a foot and a half and then dumped Elphie on her rear end.
“I’ll set you afire and that’ll be the end of you,” said Elphaba. “I’m too old for this sort of
indignity.”

It took five or six nights of trying before she managed even to hover six feet off the ground. She
had been useless in sorcery. Was she doomed to be useless at everything? It was a pleasure, finally,
to scare the barn owls and bats senseless. And it was good to be abroad. When she had more
confidence, she wobbled far down the valley to the remains of the Ozma Regent’s attempt at a dam;
she rested and hoped that she wouldn’t have to walk back. She didn’t. The broom was resistant to
her intention, but she could always threaten it with fire.
She felt like a night angel.
In midsummer, an Aijiki trader came along with pots and spoons and spools of thread, and he
carried with him some letters left at an outpost farther north. Among them was a note from Frexapparently Nanny had told him of her intentions to hunt Elphaba down, and he wrote to the mauntery,
which had forwarded the letter on to Kiamo Ko in the Vinkus. Frex wrote that Nessarose had
orchestrated a revolt, and that Munchkinland-or most of it anyway-had seceded from Oz, and set
itself up as an independent state.
Nessarose as the Eminent Thropp had become the political head of state. Frex apparently
thought this was Elphaba’s birthright, and that she should come to Colwen Grounds and challenge
her sister for it. “It may
be she isn’t the right woman for the job,” he wrote, though Elphaba found his apprehension
surprising. Wasn’t Nessarose the warmly spin-tual daughter that Elphie could never be?
Elphaba had no thirst for leadership, and did not want to challenge Nessarose in any way. But
now that the broom seemed able to carry her for long distances, she wondered if she could fly by
night to Colwen Grounds, and spend a few days seeing Papa, Nessie, and Shell once again. It had
been a dozen years since she left Nessie in Shiz, drunk and sobbing following the death of Ama
Clutch.
For Munchkinland to be free of the Wizard’s iron grip!-that alone would be worth the trip. It
made Elphie grin a bit at herself, to feel her old contempt for the Wizard flare up. Perhaps this was
what healing meant, after all.
To be safe, one afternoon Elphaba went through the soldiers’ empty barracks. She pawed
through their papers. All the documents related to issues of mapping and geological survey. Nothing
else. There seemed to be no hidden agenda of threat to the Arjikis or the other Vinkus tribes.
The earlier she went, the sooner she would return. And it would be better if no one know. So
she told everyone she was taking a period of isolation in her tower, and she wanted neither food nor
visitors for some days. When midnight struck, she set out for Coiwen Grounds, now the home of her
powerful sister.
She slept by daylight in the shadows of barns, the overhang of eaves, the lee of chimneys. She
traveled by night. In the gloom, Oz spread out below-she hovered above it at about eighty feet, near
as she could reckon-and the countryside made its geographical transformations with the ease of a
vaudeville backdrop on rollers. The hardest passage was down the steep flanks of the Great Kells.
Once free of the mountairis, however, she saw Oz level out into the rich alluvial plain of the Gillikin
River.
She flew along the waterway, above trading vessels and islands, until it fed at last into
Restwater, Oz’s largest lake. She kept to its southern edge, and took a whole night to traverse it, as it
endlessly lapped in black
oily silk waves, into sedge and swamp. She had trouble finding the mouth of the Munchkin
River, which drained into Restwater from the eastern direction. Once she did, though, it was easy to
locate the Yellow Brick Road. The farmland beyond grew even more lush. The effects of the
drought, so drastic in her childhood, had been eradicated, and dairy farms and small villages seemed
to prosper, happy as a child’s toy town set, cunning and cozy in the wrinkled, nappy land of arabic

soil and accommodating climate.
The farther east she went, however, the more torn up the highway became. Crowbars had pried
out bricks, trees had been felled and brush walls erected. It looked as if a few of the smaller bridges
had been dynamIted. A safeguard against retaliation by the Wizard’s army?
Seven days after leaving her chambers at Kiamo Ko, Elphaba flew into the hamlet of Colwen
Grounds, and slept under a green bay tree. When she awoke, she asked a merchant for the great
house, and he tremblingly pointed her the way, as if she were a demon. So a green skin still gives
Munchkinlanders the creeps, she observed, and walked the last couple of miles, and arrived at the
front gates of Colwen Grounds a little after breakfast.
She had heard her mother speak of Colwen Grounds, wistfully and angrily, as they had slopped
in waterproof boots through six inches of Quadling Country water. Elphie’s years in the smug
antiquity of Shiz, and the pomp of the Emerald City, ought to have prepared her for an imposing
mansion. But she was startled, even shocked, at the grandeur of Colwen Grounds.
The gate was gilded, the forecourt swept clean of every scrap of grass and dung, and a bank of
topiary saints in terra-cotta pots lined the balcony above the massive front door. Dignitaries with
ribbons denoting new rank and prestige in the Free State of Munchkinland, she guessed, stood in
small groups to one side. Coffee cups in hand, the officials had apparently just finished an early
morning privy council meeting. Inside the gate, swordsmen stepped neatly up and barred her way.
She began to protest-instantly branded a menace and a loon, she could see-and she was about to be
ejected when a figure wandered into view from around the corner of a folly, and called for them to
stop.
“Fabala!” he said.
“Yes, Papa, I’m here,” she answered, with a child’s politeness.
She turned. The dignitaries paused in their discussions, and then resumed, as if realizing that
overhearing this reunion would be the height of rudeness. The guards withdrew their barrier when
Frex approached. His hair was thin and long and caught up by a rawhide implement, as it always had
been. His beard was the color of cream and reached his waist when he took his hands away from it.
“This is the sister of the Eminence of the East,” said Frex, staring at Elphaba, “and my oldest
daughter. Let her pass through, dear men, now and every time she approaches.” He reached and
caught her hand, and turned his head as a bird might to see her through one capable eye. The other
eye, she realized, was dead.
“Come, we will greet each other in private, away from this attention,” said Frex. “My word,
Fabala, you have become your mother in these long years!” He linked his arm into hers, and they
went Into the building through a side door and found a small salon done up in saffron silks and plum
velvet cushions. The door closed behind them. Frex lowered himself cautiously to the sofa and
patted the upholstery next to him. She sat down, wary, tired, astonished at the wealth of her own
feeling for him. She was full of need. But, she reminded herself, you’re a grown woman.
“I knew you would come if I wrote,” he said. “Fabala, I always knew that.” He wrapped her in
his arms, stiffly. “I may cry for a minute.” When he was through, he asked her where she had gone,
and what she had done, and why she had never come back.
“I was not sure there was a back to come to,” she answered, realizing the truth of it as she
spoke. “When you finished converting a town, Papa, you moved on to new fields. Your home was in
the pasture of souls; mine never was. Besides, I had my own work to do.” She added, a moment
later, in a low voice, “Or I thought I did.”
She mentioned her years in the Emerald City, but did not say why.
“And was Nanny right? Were you a maunt? I didn’t raise you for such submission,” he said.
“I’m surprised. Such conformity and obedience-“

“I was no more a maunt than I ever was a unionist,” she chided him gently, “but I lived with the
maunts. They did good work, whatever the
error or inspiration of their beliefs. It was a time of recuperation from a difficult passage. And
then, last year, I went to the Vinkus, and I guess I’ve made my home there, although for how long I
cannot say.”
“And what do you do?” he said. “Are you married?”
“I’m a witch,” she answered. He recoiled, peered through the working eye to see if she spoke in
jest.
“Tell me about Nessie before I see her, and Shell,” she said. “Your letter sounded as if you
thought she needed help. I’ll do what I can in the short while I can be here.”
He told her about her sister’s rise to Eminence, and the secession in the late spring. “Yes, yes, I
know of it but not why,” she said, prodding. So he described the burning of a grange where
opposition meetings had been gathering, the reported rape of a couple of Munchkinlander maidens
following a cotillion of the Wizard’s army garrisoned near Dragon Cupboard. He mentioned the
Massacre at Far Applerue and the heavy taxation on farm crops. “The last straw,” he said, “as far as
Nessie was concerned, anyway, was the callow despoiling by the Wizard’s soldiers of simple
country meetinghouses.”
“Unlikely last straw,” said Elphaba. “Isn’t the back room of a colliery as holy a place to pray
as a meetinghouse? I mean, according to teaching?”
“Well, teaching,” said Frex. He shrugged; such distinctions were beyond him now. “Nessie was
incensed, and communicated her outrage, and before she knew it the spark had been thrown out and
the tinder caught. Within a week of her firing off a furious letter to the Emperor Wizard himself-a
dangerous and seditious act-the revolutionary fever had coalesced around her. It happened right here
in the forecourt of Colwen Grounds. It was magnificent, and you’d have guessed Nessie was
groomed for treason. She addressed the senior men among the farming communities both near and
far, and kept her religious agenda in check, sensibly, I think. So her appeal for their support was
overwhelmingly answered. There was a unanimous approval for secession.”
Papa’s gone pragmatic in his old age, Elphaba observed with some surprise.
“But how did you slip through the border patrols?” he asked. “Things being what they arehotting up, as they say.”
“I just flew right through, a little black bird at nighttime,” she answered, smiling at him, and
touching his hand. It was glazed and mottled pink, like a lake lobster on the boil. “But what I don’t
know, Papa, is why you called me here. What do you expect me to do?”
“I had thought you might join your sister in her seat of authority,” he said, with the simpleminded hope of one whose family has been too long apart. “I know who you are, Fabala. I doubt you
have much changed over the years. I know your cunning and your conviction. I also know that Nessie
is at the mercy of her religious voices, and she could slip and undo the terrible good she is helping to
create right now by being a focal figure for resistance. If that happens, it will not go well for her.”
So I am to be a whipping girl, thought Elphaba, I am to be a first line of defense. Her pleasure
evaporated.
“And it will not go well for them, the eager supporters,” Frex said, waving a hand to indicate
most of Munchkinland. His face sagged-his smile was an effort too, she thought coolly-and his
shoulders fell. “They have had more than a generation of gentle dictatorship from our Glorious
Wizard scoundrel-oh, even I forget, we’re now in the Free State of Munchkinland-these farmers
surely underestimate the size of the eventual retaliation. In fact, Shell has found from reliable sources
that the stockpiles of grain in the Emerald City are massive, and we can be left for some time without
needing to be overrun. Short of routing some divisions of soldiers across the border, and jailing

some drunken hooligans, this has been a most genteel disengagement so far. We are deluded into
believing we are safe. I mean Nessie is deluded too, I think. You, I have always felt, had a clearer
mind about you. You can help her prepare, you can provide the balance and the support.”
“I always did that, Papa,” she said. “In childhood and at college. Now I am told she can stand
up for herself”
“You’ve heard of my precious shoes,” he said. “I bought them from a decrepit crone, and then I
retooled them for Nessa with my own hands, using skills in glass and metal that I had once learned
from Turtle Heart. I made them to give her a sense of beauty, but I didn’t expect them to be enchanted
by someone else. I am not sorry they are. But Nessa now thinks she needs no one, to help her stand or
help her govern. She listens less than ever. In some ways I think those shoes are dangerous.”
“I wish you had made them for me, Papa,” she said in a quiet voice.
“You didn’t need them. You had your voice, your intensity, even your cruelty as your armor.”
“My cruelty!” She reared back.
“Oh, you were a fiendish little thing,” said Frex, “but so what, children grow into and out of
themselves. You were a terror when you first were around other children. You only calmed down
when we began to travel and you got to hold the baby. It was Nessarose who tamed you, you know.
You have her to thank; she was holy and blessed even from the day she was born. Even as an infant,
she soothed your wildness with her obvious need. You don’t remember that, I suppose.”
Elphie wasn’t able to remember, she wasn’t able to think about all that. Even the idea of being
cruel was slipping from her. Instead, she was trying to feel fondness toward her father, despite the
exhaustion of being commandeered to be a second lieutenant once again, in service of dear needy
Nessarose. She concentrated on her father’s concern for the citizens of Munchkinland. Ever a
pastoral sensibility, his. Though rejecting his theology, she adored him for his commitment.
“I must hear more about Turtle Heart one day,” she said in a light voice, “but now, I suppose I
should go greet my sister. And I will think about what you say, Papa. I can’t imagine being part of a
governmental troika, with you and Nessarose-or a committee, should Shell be involved too. But I’ll
suspend judgment for a while. And Shell, Papa, how is he?”
“Behind enemy lines, so they say,” Frex answered as she got up to leave. “He is a foolhardy
boy and will be among the first casualties, once this really gets going. He resembles you in some
ways.”
“He’s gone green?” she asked, amused.
“He’s stubborn as sin stains,” he answered.
Nessarose was secluded in an upstairs parlor, conducting her morning meditation. Frex saw that
Elphaba was given license to wander about the house and demesne. After all, in another
configuration of events, Elphaba could have been (or could yet become) the Eminent Thropp, the
Eminence of the East, the nominated head of the Free State of Munchkinland. Frex watched his green
daughter amble down marble
:orridors, dragging her broom like a charwoman, gazing at the ormolu, the damask, the fresh
flowers, the servants in livery, the portraits. He felt, as always, a twinge of pain deep in his breast,
for the hidden and unknowable things that he had done wrong in raising her. But he was glad that she
was here at last.
Elphaba found her way into a private chapel at the end of a hail of poiished mahogany. It was
baroque rather than ancient, and it was in the midst of being redecorated. Nessarose must have
ordered the frescoes to be whitewashed; perhaps the succulent images would distract people from
theft meditative tasks. Elphie sat on a bench on the side, amidst buckets of limestone wash and
paintbrushes and ladders. She did not pretend to pray, though she felt very uneasy about this whole
thing. She trained her gaze, to focus her mind, on a huge section still boasting its images. It featured

several rotund angels levitating with the aid of sizable wings. Theft garments bad been cut to
accommodate the anatomical irregularity, she saw. They were rather full-bodied dames, but the
wings weren’t bulging with straining arteries nor snapping at the tip. The artist had considered the
optimal length and breadth of wing required to hoist ample ladies aloft. The formula looked to be
about three times wing length to the length of arm, corrected perhaps to account for the portliness. If
you could sweep your way to the Other Land on wings, what about on a broom? she wondered. And
realized she must be very tired; usually she’d cut off senseless speculation about unionist nonsense
like an afterlife, a Beyond, an Other Land.
I should remember my lessons from that life sciences course, she thought. All the devastating
borders of knowledge Doctor Dillamond was about to cross. I almost understood some of it. I could
stitch wings onto Chistery. He could join me in flight. What a lark.
She rose and went to find her sister.
Nessarose was less surprised to see Elphaba than Elphie would have guessed. Perhaps, Elphie
considered, it was because Nessa had become used to being the center of attention. Then again, she
had always been the center of attention. “Darling Elphie,” she said, looking up from a pair of
identical books some attendant had laid out, next to each other, so she could read four pages without
calling for someone to turn the page. “Give us a kiss.”
“Oh there, then,” Elphie said, obliging. “How are you, Nessie? You look fine.”
Nessarose stood, in her beautiful shoes, and smiled brilliantly. “The grace of the Unnamed God
gives me strength, as ever,” she said.
But Elphaba could not be annoyed. “You have risen, and I don’t just mean to your feet,” she
said. “History has chosen you for a role, and you’ve accepted it. I’m proud of you.”
“You needn’t be proud,” said Nessarose. “But thank you, dear. I thought you’d probably come.
Did Father drag you here to take care of me?”
“No one dragged me here, but Papa did write.”
“So all those years in solitude, and political turmoil brings you out at last. Where were you?”
“Here and there.”
“You know we thought you’d died,” said Nessarose. “Drape that shawl around my shoulders
and fix it with a pin, will you, so I needn’t call a maid? I mean that awful, awful time when you left
me alone in 5hz. I am still furious with you about it, I just remembered.” She curled her lip, prettily;
Elphaba was glad to see she possessed at least a residual sense of humor.
“We were all young then, and perhaps I was wrong,” said Elphie. “It didn’t do you any lasting
harm, anyway. At least not so I can see.”
“I had to put up with Madame Morrible all by myself, for two more years. Glinda was a help
for a while, then she graduated and went on. Nanny was my salvation, but she was old even then.
She’s gone on to you lately, hasn’t she? Well, back then I felt horribly alone. Only my faith saw me
through.”
“Well, faith will do that,” said Elphie, “if you’ve got it.”
“You speak as one still living in the shadowland of doubt.”
“In fact I think we have more important things to discuss than the state of my soul or lack thereof
You have a revolution on your hands- sorry, I guess I’ve gotten out of the habit!-and you’re the
resident commander general. Congratulations.”
“Oh, tiresome events of the distracting world, yes yes,” said Nessarose. “Look, it’s just
beautiful out there in the gardens. Let’s go walk for a bit and get some air. You look green about the
gills-“
“All right, I deserved that-“
“-and there’s plenty of time to go into diplomatic matters. I have a meeting in a little while, but

there’s time for a stroll. You should get to know this place. Let me show it to you.”
Elphaba could only get Nessarose’s attention for small snatches of time. However dismissive
of the demands of leadership, Nessarose was clearheaded about her schedule, and spent hours
preparing for meetings.
And at first the discussion was frivolous-family memories, school days. Elphie was impatient
to get around to the meat of the matter here. But Nessarose wouldn’t be rushed. Sometimes she let
Elphie sit in when she held audiences with citizens. Elphie wasn’t entirely pleased with what she
saw.
One afternoon an old woman from some hamlet in the Corn Basket came in. She made
obeisance in a most disgusting and obsequious manner, and Nessarose seemed to shine back at her
with glory. The woman complained that she had a maid who, having fallen in love with a
woodcutter, wanted to leave her service to get married. But the old woman had already given three
sons to the new local militia for defense, and she and the maid were all the labor available to bring
in the crops. If the maid ran off with her woodcutter, the crops would spoil and she would be ruined.
“And all for the sake of liberty,” she concluded bitterly.
“Well, what do you want me to do about it?” said the Eminence of the East.
“I can give you two Sheep and a Cow,” said the woman.
“I have livestock-” said Nessarose, but Elphaba interrupted and said, “Did you say Sheep? A
Cow? You mean Animals?”
“My very own Animals,” the woman replied proudly.
“How do you come to own Animals?” Elphaba asked, her teeth clenched. “Are Animals no
more than chattel now in Munchkinland?”
“Elphie, please,” said Nessarose quietly.
“What will you take to release them?” demanded Elphie, in a passion.
“I already said. Do something about this woodcutter.”
“What do you have in mind?” interrupted Nessarose, displeased that her sister was usurping her
role as arbiter ofjustice.
“I brought you his axe. I thought you might bewitch it and cause it tokill him.”
“Fie,” said Elphaba, but Nessarose said, “Oh well, that wouldn’t be very nice.”
“Very nice?” Elphie said. “No indeed it wouldn’t be very nice, Nessie.”
“Well, you’re the legal answer around here,” said the old woman stoutly. “What do you
suggest?”
“I might bewitch his axe and let it slip,” said Nessarose thoughtfully, “just enough perhaps to
cut off his arm. I know from experience that a person without an arm isn’t as desirable to the
opposite sex as one fully armed.”
“Fair enough,” said the woman, “but if it doesn’t work I’ll come back and you’ll do more, for
the same price. Sheep and a Cow don’t come cheap around here, you know.”
“Nessarose, you’re not a witch, no, I don’t believe it,” said Elphie. “You don’t do spells, of all
things!”
“The righteous person can work miracles in the honor of the Unnamed God,” said Nessarose
calmly. “Show me that axe, if you’ve brought it.”
The old woman held forward a woodcutter’s axe, and Nessarose knelt down near it, as if she
were praying. It was an odd, even a frightening thing, to see that narrow armless body able to lean
forward, unaided and off balance, and then, when the spell was through, able to right itself. Those
are some shoes, thought Elphie soberly, bitterly. Glinda has got some power in her, for all her social
dazzle, or maybe the power comes from the love of our father for his Nessie. Or some combination.
And if Nessarose isn’t pulling the wool over this old biddy’s eyes, she’s become a sorceress too, by

whatever name she chooses to call it.
“You are a witch,” said Elphaba again; she couldn’t help it. This perhaps was a mistake, as the
old woman was just thanking Nessarose for her efforts. “I’ll bring the Animals by the barn out back,”
she said. “They’re tethered in town.”
“Animals! Tethered!” exclaimed Elphie, seething.
“Thank you, Miss Eminence,” said the old woman. “The Eminence of the East. Or should I call
you the Witch of the East?” She grinned toothily, having gotten her way, and went out the door
carrying the enchanted axe over her shoulder the way a strapping young lumberjack would do.
They weren’t to be alone again for a while. Elphaba went prowling around the stable and sheds
until she found an attendant who could point her toward the two Sheep and the Cow. They were in a
pen with clean straw, each one facing a different corner, chewing in abstraction.
“You’re the new Animals, brought here by that old vengeful fiend,” said Elphaba. The Cow
looked over as if unaccustomed to being addressed. The Sheep made no sign of having understood.
“What’s your beef?” said the Cow, in a dark humor.
“I’ve been living in the Vinkus,” said Elphie. “There aren’t many Animals there. At one time I
was an agitator in the Animal Rights grassroots sweep-I don’t really know how things stand for
Munchkinlander Animals now. What can you tell me?”
“I can tell you to mind your own business,” said the Cow.
“And the Sheep?”
“These Sheep can tell you nothing, they’ve gone dumb.”
“Are they-sheep? Does that happen?”
“They talk about humans becoming vegetables-or nuts-or even fruits,” said the Cow, “but they
don’t mean it literally. Sheep don’t become sheep, they become mute Sheep. They don’t really need
to be discussed here as if they’re not listening, by the way.”
“Of course. My apologies,” she said to the Sheep, one of whom blinked balefully. To the Cow
she added, “I’d rather call you by your name.”
“I’ve given up using my name in public,” said the Cow. “It’s not afforded me any individual
rights to have an individual name. I reserve it for my private use.”
“I understand that,” said Elphaba. “I feel the same. I’m just the Witch now.”
“Her Eminence herself?” A gummy rope of spittle dropped from the Cow’s jaw. “I’m flattered.
I didn’t know you called yourself Witch, I thought that was just a nasty backfield nickname. The
Witch of the East.”
“Well no. I’m her sister. I suppose I’m the Witch of the VVest, if you will.” She grinned. “In
fact I didn’t know she was so disliked.”
The Cow had blundered. “Surely I meant no disregard to your family,” she said. “I should just
keep my mouth closed and concentrate on my cud. The thing is, I’m In shock-to be sold in exchange
for a witch’s spell! There’s nothing wrong with that woodcutter-oh I’ve got ears, I have, though they
forget-and the thought of a warmhearted simpleton like Nick Chopper coming to harm through a
witch’s spell-and I part of the barter cost-well, it’s hard to imagine how much lower one could sink
in life.”
“I’ve come to free you,” Elphie said.
“By whose authority?” The Cow snorted suspiciously.
“I told you, I’m the sister of the Eminent Thropp-the Eminence of the East.” She amended
herself: “The Witch of the East. It’s my prerogative here.”
“And free to go where? To do what?” said the Cow. “We’d get from here to Lower Mucksiop
and be roped in again. Subjected to slavery under the Wizard, and catechisms under the Eminent
Thropp! We don’t exactly blend in with those creepy little Munchkinlander humans.”

“You’re gone a bit dour,” said Flphaba.
“Haven’t you ever heard of a mad Cow?” she answered. “Sweetheart, my udder is sore from
their daily yanking. I am tapped for milk morning and night. I won’t even go into what it’s like to be
mounted by a-well, just never mind. But worst, my children have been fattened on milk and
slaughtered for veal. I could hear their cries from the abattoir, they didn’t even bother to move me
out of hearing range!” Here she turned her head to the wall, and the Sheep came up on either side of
her, pressing like a living pair of warm bookends against her lower sides and underbelly.
Elphaba said, “I can’t be sorrier or more ashamed. Look, I was working with Doctor
Dillamond-have you heard of him?-in Shiz, years ago. I went to the Wizard himself to protest what
was happening..
“Oh, the Wizard doesn’t show himself to the likes of us,” said the Cow, after she had regained
her composure. “I don’t feel like talking anymore. Everybody’s on your side until they want
something from you. The Eminent Nessarose has probably brought us in order to impress us into
some religious ceremonial procession. My silken flanks tarted up with garlands or the like. And we
all know what happens next.”
“Now you must be wrong in that,” said the Witch. “I do object.
Nessarose is a strict unionist. They don’t go in for-blood sacrifice-“
“Times change,” said the Cow. “And she’s got a population of illeducated, nervous subjects to pacify. What, pray tell, works better than ritual slaughter?”
“But however could it come to this?” said the Witch. “Assuming you’re telling the truth? This is
farming country. You ought to be well established here.”
“Animals in pens have lots of time to develop theories,” said the Cow. “I’ve heard more than
one clever creature draw a connection between the rise of tiktokism and the erosion of traditional
Animal labor. We weren’t beasts of burden, but we were good reliable laborers. If we were made
redundant in the workforce, it was only a matter of time before we’d be socially redundant too.
Anyway, that’s one theory. My own feeling is that there is real evil abroad in the land. The Wizard
sets the standard for it, and the society follows suit like a bunch of sheep. Forgive the slanderous
reference,” she said, nodding to her companions in the pen. “It was a slip.”
Elphaba threw open the gate of the pen. “Come on, you’re free,” she said. “What you make of it
is your own affair. If you turn it down, it’s on your own heads.”
“It’s on our own heads if we walk out, too. Do you think a Witch who would charm an axe to
dismember a human being would pause over a couple of Sheep and an annoying old Cow?”
“But this might be your only chance!” Elphaba cried.
The Cow moved out, and the Sheep followed. “We’ll be back,” she said. “This is an exercise
in your education, not ours. Mark my words, my rump’ll be served up rare on your finest Dixxi
House porcelain dinner plates before the year is out.” She mooed a last remark-“I hope you choke”and, tail swishing the flies, she meandered away.
An ambassador from the Glikkus, darling,” Nessarose said, when Elphaba demanded a meeting.
“Really, I can’t turn her away. She’s come to discuss mutual defense pacts in the event that the
Glikkus
secedes next. She thinks there are agents trailing her family, and she needs to leave on her return
journey tonight. But we’ll dine together, just like old times? You, me, and my server?”
Elphaba had no choice but to while away another afternoon. She located Frex and persuaded
him to go for a stroll out beyond the ornamental ponds and pristine lawns, where the woods came up
to the back edge of Colwen Grounds. He walked so stiffly, so slowly, it was torture; she was a
strider. But she kept herself in check.
“How do you find your sister?” he asked her. “After all these years? Much changed?”

“She was always confident, in her way,” Elphie said reservedly.
“I never thought so, and I don’t now,” Frex said. “But I think it was a good act, and it’s gotten
better.”
“What really did you ask me to come here for, Papa?” Elphaba said. “I haven’t much time, you
know. You must be frank.”
“You would make a smarter Eminence than Nessie,” he said. “And it’s your birthright. Yes, I
know the strict rules of title inheritance weren’t important to your mother. I just think that the people
of Munch-kinland would do better with you at the helm. Nessa is-too devout, if such a thing exists.
Too devout to be a central figure in public life, anyway.”
“This may be the only respect in which I take after my mother,” Elphaba said, “but an inherited
position is of no interest to me, and it carries no weight at all that I’m the rightful Eminence. I’ve
long ago abdicated my position in the family in that respect. Nessarose has every right to abdicate
hers, and then Shell can be located to stand in. Or better yet, the foolish custom can be abolished,
and let the Munchkinlanders govern themselves to death.”
“Nobody ever suggested a leader isn’t just as much a scapegoat as a lowly peon,” said Frex.
“Anyway, it’s possible. But I’m talking about leadership, not about rank and privilege. I’m talking
about the nature of the times we live in, and the job that needs to be done. Fabala, you were always
the more capable sibling. Shell is a madcap cutup, currently playing secret agent, and Nessie is a
bruised little girl-“
“Oh please,” she said in disgust. “Isn’t it time to get over that?”
“She hasn’t,” he said, hurt. “Do you see her wrapped in some
lover’s arms? Do you see her bearing her own children, engaging in life in a way that makes
sense? She hides behind her devotion the way a terrorist hIdes behind his ideals-” He saw her ffinch
at this, and paused.
“I have known terrorists capable of love,” she said evenly, “and I have known good maunts,
unmarried and childless, doing charity for stricken people.”
“Have you known Nessa to have an adult bond with anyone other than the Unnamed God?”
“You’re one to talk,” she said. “You had your wife and your children, but they came lower on
the order of priorities than Quadlings waiting to be converted.”
“I did what had to be done,” he said rigidly. “I won’t be lectured by my daughter.”
“Well, I won’t be lectured by you about my everlasting duties to Nessie. I gave her my
childhood, I got her going at Shiz. She’s made her life the way she wants it, and she still has choice
and free will even now. And so do her subjects, who can depose her and cut off her head if her
prayers get in their way.”
“She is a rather powerful woman,” Frex said sadly. Elphie glanced sideways at him, and for the
first time she saw him as feckless-the kind of old man that Irji, if he survived, would grow to be.
Constantly pawing at the edge of events, reacting instead of acting, mourning the past and praying for
the future instead of stirring up the present.
“How did she get so powerful?” she asked, trying to be kind. “She had two good parents.”
He didn’t answer this.
They walked on and came out of the woods along the edge of a cornfield. A couple of
farmhands were repairing a fence and erecting a scarecrow. “Afternoon, Brother Frexspar,” they
said, doffing theft caps. They looked a little askance at Elphaba. When she and her father had
continued out of earshot, she said, “They were wearing a little talisman or something on theft tunics,
did you see it? It looked like a small straw dolly or something.”
“Oh yes, the straw man.” He sighed. “Another pagan custom that had almost gone underground,
and then was revived during the Great Drought. Ignorant field-workers wear a straw man as a charm

against the pests of crops: drought, crows, insects, rot. Once upon a time there was a
tradition of human sacrifice about it.” He paused to catch his breath and wipe his face. “Our
family friend, Turtle Heart, the Quadling-he was butchered right here in Coiwen Grounds, on the day
that Nessarose was born. An itinerant dwarf and a huge tiktok entertaining clock were making the
circuit that year, and providing a conduit for the ugliest of human inclinations. We arrived here just
in time for Turtle Heart to be nabbed. I’ve never forgiven myself for not seeing what was about to
happen-but your mother was in her labor, and we’d been run out of town. I wasn’t thinking clearly
enough all the way around things.”
Elphaba had heard all this before-even so. “You were in love with him,” she said, to make it
easier.
“We both were, we shared him,” said Frex. “Your mother and I did. It was a lifetime ago and I
don’t know why anymore; I don’t think I knew why then. I haven’t loved anyone else since your
mother died, except of course my children.”
“\Vhat a brutal history of sacrifices,” she said. “I was just talking to a Cow who expects to be a
blood victim. Is that possible?”
“The more civilized we become, the more horrendous our entertainments,” said Frex.
“And it’ll never change, or will it? I remember the etymology of the word Oz, at least as
proposed at a lecture by our Head, Madame Morrible. She said that academics were inclined to
locate the root of the term in the Gillikinese cognate oos, which carries freights of meaning about
growth, development, power, generation. Even ooze, with its distant companion noun virus, is
thought to belong to the same general family. The older I get, the more accurate this derivation seems
to be.”
“And yet the poet of the Oziad calls it ‘Land of green abandon, land in endless leaf.’”
“Poets are just as responsible for empire building as any other professional hacks.”
“Sometimes I would give anything to get away from here, but I dread the thought of a trip across
the deadly sands.”
“That’s only a legend,” said Elphie. “Papa, you taught me that the sands are no more deadly
than these fields. That reminds me of the other theory, that Oz is related to the word oasis. \Vhat the
nomadic peoples of the north thought of Gillikin, time beyond thinking, when Oz was first
discovered and settled. Now look, Papa, you needn’t go so far. The Vinkus is nearly another
country. Why don’t you come back with me?”
“I would love to, honey,” he said. “But how could I leave Nessarose? I never could.”
“Even if she’s Turtle Heart’s daughter and not yours?” she said, stingingly because stung.
“Especially if that,” he answered.
And Elphaba saw that by not knowing for sure if Nesssarose had been fathered by himself or by
Turtle Heart, Frex had decided in some subrational way that she was the daughter of them both.
Nessarose was the proof of their brief union-thefts, and, obviously, Melena’s as well. It didn’t
matter how crippled Nessarose was; she would always be more than Elphaba, always. She would
always mean more.
Elphaba and Nessarose sat in Nessa’s bedchamber. A handmaid served some soup made of
cow’s stomach. Elphie, not normally squeamish, couldn’t eat it. The maid neatly spooned tiny
portions into Nessie’s mouth.
“I’m not going to beat around the bush,” Nessarose said. “I would like you to join me here as a
sister-at-arms, to lead my circle of advisors and to manage in my absence if I should travel.”
“I have no love of Munchkinland, from what I’ve seen so far,” said Elphaba. “The people are
cruel and impressed by charades, the pomp of this place is oppressive, and I do believe you’re
sitting on a powder keg.”

“All the more reason you should stay and help me,” said Nessarose. “Weren’t we raised up to
expect a life of service?”
“Your shoes have made you strong,” said Elphie. “I didn’t know shoes could do that. I don’t
think you need me. Don’t lose those shoes, though.” She thought: Your shoes give you an unnatural
balance. You look like a serpent standing on its tail.
“Surely you remember them from before?”
“Yes, but I hear Glinda amplified them with a magic spell, or something.”
“Oh, that Glinda! What a card.” Nessie swallowed and smiled. “Well, you can have the shoes,
my dear-over my dead body. I’ll rewrite my will and leave them to you. Though what they would do
for you, I can hardly imagine. They didn’t grow me new arms. Perhaps enchanted shoes
won’t change the color of your skin but will make you enticing enough so that it won’t matter.”
“I’m already too old to be that enticing.”
“Why you’re still in the prime of life, and so am I!” said Nessarose, laughing. “Tell me you’ve
got some romancing man in a Vinkus yurt or tent or teepee or whatever it is they call home there.
Come on.”
“I have been wondering something, ever since I saw you do that spell this morning,” Elphie
said. “The spell over the axe.”
“Oh right. Small potatoes, that one.”
“Do you by any chance remember that time in Shiz, when Madame Morrible said she was
putting us under a spell? And that we couldn’t talk to each other about it?”
“Go on. Sounds familiar. She was so creepy, wasn’t she? A master of tyranny.”
“She said she had chosen us-me, you, and Glinda-to be Adepts. To be agents of someone quite
high up. To be sorceresses and, I don’t know, secret accomplices. She promised we’d be highly
placed and effectual. She made us think we couldn’t ever discuss it with one another.”
“Oh yes, that. I do remember. What a witch she was.”
“Well, do you think there’s any truth to that? Do you think she had the power to bind us into
silence? To make us powerful sorceresses?”
“She had the power to scare us out of our wits, but we were young and very stupid, as I
remember.”
“I had the feeling at the time that she was in collusion with the Wizard, and that she ordered her
tiktok thing-Grommetik, the name’s just come back to me, isn’t memory odd like that-to kill Doctor
Dillamond.”
“You saw fiends with knives behind every chair, you always did,” Nessarose said. “I don’t
think that Madame Morrible had any real power. She was a manipulative woman, but her power was
very limited, and in our naivete we saw her as a villain. She was merely full of self-importance.”
“I wonder. I tried to say something about it afterward. Didn’t we all faint?”
“We were innocent and horribly suggestible, Elphie.”
“And Glinda’s gone on to marry money, as Madame Morrible said. Is Sir Chuffrey still alive?”
“If you can call it that, yes. And Glinda is a sorceress, there’s no questioning that. But Madame
Morrible was merely predicting things to us; she saw our talents, as an educator could be expected
to do, and she advised us on how to make the most of them. What’s so surprising about that?”
“She tried to seduce us into a secret service for an unknown master. I’m not inventing this,
Nessie.”
“She knew how to get toyou, obviously, by appealing to your sense of conspiracy. I don’t
remember such alluring nonsense.”
Elphaba fell silent. Perhaps Nessie was right. And yet here they were, a dozen years later: two
Witches, in a manner of speaking. And Glinda a sorceress for the public good. It was enough to make

Elphie go back to Kiamo Ko and burn that Grimmerie, and burn the broom too, for that matter.
“She always reminded Glinda of a carp,” said Nessarose. “Can you really be scared of a fish,
after all these years?”
“I saw in a book once a drawing of a lake monster, or a sea monster if you believe in oceans,”
said Elphie. “I may not be sure if monsters exist, but I’d rather live my life in doubt than be
persuaded by a real experience of one.”
“You said much the same thing about the Unnamed God once,” said Nessarose quietly.
“Oh, now please don’t start on that.”
“A soul is too valuable to ignore, Elphie.”
“Well, isn’t it good I don’t have one then, so there’s no muss, no fuss.”
“You have a soul. Everyone does.”
“How about the Cow you bartered for today, and the Sheep?”
“I’m not talking about lower orders.”
“That sort of talk offends me, Nessie. I freed those Animals today, you know.”
Nessarose shrugged. “You have some rights in Colwen Grounds. I’m not going to walk around
prohibiting your little pet missions.”
“They said some pretty horrible things about how Animals are being treated here. I thought it
was the Emerald City and Gillikin only; I somehow guessed Munchkinland, being more rural, would
have more common sense.”
“You know,” said Nessie, indicating that the maid should wipe her mouth with a napkin, “once
at a prayer service I met a soldier. He had lost a limb in a campaign against some restless Quadlings.
He said every morning he slapped the stump where his arm used to be. He got the blood ringing, and
after a few minutes there was a tingling sensation, and he developed a kind of phantom limb. Not all
at once, and not in physical form: What he regained was a sense of what it had felt like. It would
grow to the elbow, and then his memory, his bodily memory, of limbs in three-dimensional space,
would extend, eventually, all the way down to his fingers. Once his phantom limb was in place,
mentally, that is, he could face the day as a crippled man. Furthermore, he had better physical
balance.”
Elphaba, feeling more and more like a real Witch, looked at her sister, waiting for the punch.
“I tried it for a while. For months in fact. I had Nanny massage my little knobs there. After much
hard work on poor Nanny’s part, I began to develop just the beginning of a sense of what it would be
like to have arms. It never went very far, until Glinda dazzled up these shoes. Now- I don’t know
why, maybe they’re too tight and my circulation is complaining–after an hour on my feet, I have
phantom arms. First time in my life. I can’t quite get the feel of fingers.”
“Phantom limbs,” said Elphie. “Well, I’m pleased for you.”
“You know, if you slapped yourself around, spiritually speaking,” said Nessarose, “you might
develop a phantom soul, or something that felt like one. It’s a good internal guide, a soul. I suspect
you might even recognize that it’s not a phantom at all-it’s a real one.”
“That’ll do, Nessie,” said Elphaba. “I don’t care to discuss my spiritual trials with you.”
“Why don’t you stay here with me, join my staff, and we can have you baptized,” said
Nessarose warmly.
“Water is profoundly painful to me, as you well know, and I won’t discuss it again. I can’t
pledge allegiance to anything Unnamed. It’s a sham.”
“You’re condemning yourself to a life of sadness,” Nessarose said.
“sVell, that I’m already familiar with, so at least there’s nothing to jump out and surprise me.”
Elphie threw down her napkin. “I can’t stay
here, Nessie. I can’t help you out. I have responsibilities of my own back in the Vinkus, which

you have shown precious little interest in finding out about. Oh, all right, I know, a revolution has
occurred and you’re a new prime minister or something, you surely have a right to be distracted if
anyone does. Either accept the burden of leadership or turn it down, but either way make sure it’s
your choice in the matter, and not an accident of history, a martyrdom by default. I worry about you,
but I can’t stay and be your dogsbody.”
“I’ve just been clumsy and outspoken. Don’t expect me to remember how to be sisterly in such a
short while-“
“You’ve had Shell to practice on all these years,” Elphaba said sternly.
“Just like that, you’re getting up and going?” Nessarose stood too, in that sinuous, unsettling
way she had. “After twelve years of separation, we have three, four days of reunion and that’s that?”
“Keep yourself well,” Elphie said, and kissed her sister on both cheeks. “I know you’ll be a
good Eminence for as long as you want to be.”
“I shall pray for your soul,” promised Nessarose.
“I shall wait for your shoes,” Elphie answered.
On her way out, Elphie thought about going to say good-bye to her father, and then decided
against it. She had said to him everything that she could bring herself to say. They had ganged up on
her, in the claustrophobic, lovIng way of families, and she wanted no more of it.
Taking the northern route over the Madeleines, she realized she would pass Lake Chorge. She
decided to pause there, about halfway home, interested to note that she was actually glad to be
heading back. She paced the edge of the lake, looking for Caprice-in-the-Pines, but she could not
pick it out of the many resort villas that had sprung up since that visit in her youth.
But it wasn’t the visible terrain she was really seeing. It was the world at large. The character
it seemed to have, how it seemed to refer to itself. How could Nessarose believe in the Unnamed
God? Behind every
aspect of the world is another aspect of the world. In a sense, wasn’t that what Doctor
Dillamond had been on about? He had imagined another true foundation of the world, defensible by
proofs and experiments; he had figured out how to locate it. But she was not a visionary. Behind the
blue and white marbleized paper of the lake, beyond the watered silk of the sky, Elphaba couldn’t
see any deeper in.
Not about the raw material of life: the muscle structure of angels’ wings, the capillary action
involved in focusing a gimlet gaze. Nor about the gooey subjects of the empyrean: not about good, if
the Unnamed God was good. Not about evil, either.
For who was in thrall to whom, really? And could it ever be known? Each agent working in
collusion and antagonism-like the cold and the sun alike creating a deadly spear of ice . . . Was the
Wizard a charlatan, a fraud, a despot of merely human power and failure? Did he control the AdeptsNessarose and Glinda, and an unnamed third, for it surely wasn’t Elphie-or was it only put to him by
Madame Morrible that he did, to assuage his obvious ego, his appetite for the semblance of power?
And Madame Morrible? And Yackle? Was there any connection? Were they the same person,
were they harsh divinities, avatars of a power of darkness, were they poisonous flitches struck from
the evil body of the Kumbric Witch? Or were they-singly, or together-old Kumbricia herself, or such
as could be presumed to have survived from the heroic age of mythology into these crabbed,
cramped, modern days? Did they govern the Wizard, jerk him about like a marionette?
Who is in thrall to whom?
And while you wait to learn, the deadly icicle, formed by all opposing forces, falls and drives
its cold nail into penetrable flesh.
She left the pine-needled shores of Lake Chorge in a state of high frustration and energy. Having
no confidence to decide about matters of political or theological hierarchy, she felt driven to dig up

those old notes she had collected from Doctor Dillamond’s study the day after he was murdered.
Something concrete under her fingertips. A magnifying lens, a surgical knife, a sterilized probe.
Perhaps now she was old enough to understand what he had been getting at. He had been a unionist
essentialist; she was a novice atheist. But she still might profit from his work, after all this time.
The winds were with her as far as the lower slopes of the Great Kells. Thereafter she had a
harder time, both finding her way and keeping her seat. A number of times she had to dismount and
walk. Fortunately it wasn’t very cold, and she came upon small clusters of nomads in the protected
vales, who kept her heading in the right direction. Still, she was two weeks returning, even with the
help of a broom.
Late in the afternoon, with the sun still hot and high compared to its winter habits, she toiled her
way up the last slopes, Kiamo Ko raising its narrow dark profile above her. She felt like a child
looking up at the top hat of a very tall gentleman. Eager to avoid ceremony and fuss, she skirted the
village. Without the broom this approach would be nearly impossible; as it was, even the broom
seemed to be feeling the effort. She came to a halt in the orchard, made her way to the back door, and
found it open, which meant the sisters were out flower picking or some such nonsense.
The place was quiet. She grabbed a browning apple from the sideboard and trudged up the
steps of her tower without running into anyone. When she passed Nanny’s room, she rattled the
doorknob and said, “Nanny?”
“Oh,” came a little shriek, “you startled me!”
“May I come in?”
“Just a minute.” There was the sound of furniture being dragged away from the door. “Well, this
is a fine mess, Miss Elphaba! Going off and leaving us to be murdered in our beds, or just as likely!”
“What are you talking about? Let me in.”
“And not saying a word. You had us frantic with worry-” The last piece scraped across the
floor, and Nanny flung open the door. “You hideous ungrateful woman!” She fell heavily into her
arms and burst into tears.
“Please, I’ve had enough drama to last me the rest of my life,” said Elphaba. “What are you
going on about?”
Nanny took some while to calm down. She rummaged through her bag for some smelling salts,
pulling out enough little bottles and satchels to set up her own apothecary business. There were blue
glass vials, clear piliboxes, snakeskin envelopes of powders and pills, and a beautiful green glass
bottle that had an old torn label on it, MIRACLE ELI-.
She administered calming agents to herself, and when she could breathe again, she said, “Well,
you know-my dear-you saw I suppose, that everyone has disappeared?”
Elphaba scowled in confusion. And rising, sudden fear.
Nanny took a deep breath. “Now don’t be angry at Nanny. It’s not Nanny’s fault. Those soldiers
suddenly decided that their exercises were finished. I don’t know how, maybe Nor told them you
were gone? She told us; she’d been sneaking around looking for your broom, and she said you
weren’t here. So maybe she mentioned it to them. You know how nice they were to her, how they
adored her. The soldiers came to the front door and said that they needed to escort the entire family,
Sarima and her sisters and Nor and Irji, back to their base camp, wherever it is. They didn’t require
me, they said, which was very insulting indeed, and I let them know as much. Sarima asked why, and
that nice Commander Cherrystone said that it was for their own protection. In case a fighting
battalion comes through, he said, it won’t do to have any members of the ruling family still here, or
there might be a bloody incident.”
“Coming through, a battalion? When?” Elphie hit the windowsill with her open palm.
“I’m trying to tell you. No time soon, he said; this is just advance planning. They became

insistent. Those soldiers scattered the peasants in the village-I don’t think there was any killing, it all
seemed quite humane, except for the chains-and only I was left behind, being too old to march down
a mountain, and no relation besides. Also, they left Liir, since he was no threat and I think they’d
become fond of him. But a few days later Lift disappeared, too. I’m sure he was desperately lonely
for them, and he must have followed them to their camp.”
‘And nobody protested?” shrieked Elphie.
“Don’t yell at me. Of course they protested. Well, Sarima fell in a heap, fainting dead away,
and liji and Nor looked after her. But the sisters, that mealy-mouthed lot, they barricaded the dining
room and set fire to the chapel wing, trying to draw attention, and Three slammed a sharpening stone
on the hand of Commander Cherrystone and broke every bone in his wrist, I bet. Five and Six rang
the bell, but the shepherds are too far away, and it all happened too fast. Two wrote messages and
tried to tie them to the feet of your crows, but they wouldn’t be liberated, they just kept roosting on
the wIndowsills again, useless old things. Four had a great idea about boiling oil, but they couldn’t
get the flame high enough.
Oh, it was a merry chase here for a day or two, but of course the soldiers won. Men always
win.”
Nanny continued petulantly, “And we all thought they’d ambushed you earlier, to get you out of
the way. You’re the only effective one here, everyone knows that. They all think you’re a Witch. The
townspeople told me that if you come back you’re to be in touch with the hamlet of Red Windmill
down below the dam, you know the one. They seem to think you can rescue their royal family, such
as they are. I told them it was misplaced trust, that you wouldn’t be interested, but I promised to give
you the message, so there it is.”
Elphaba strode back and forth. She pulled her hair from its customary knot and shook it out, as
if trying to shake away what she was hearing. “And Chistery?” she said at last.
“Cowering behind the piano in the music room, no doubt.”
“Well, this is a fine kettle of fish.”
She strode, she sat, she stroked her chin, she kicked Nanny’s chamber pot and broke it. “What
have I got,” she mumbled. “There’s the broom. There’s the bees. There’s the monkey. There’s
Killyjoy-did they hurt Killyjoy? There’s Killyjoy. There’s the crows. There’s Nanny. There’s the
villagers, if they’re unharmed. There’s the questionable Grimmerie. It’s not a lot.”
“No, it’s not,” said Nanny, sighing. “Doom, doom, I say.”
“We can get them back,” said Elphie. “We will.”
“Count Nanny in,” said Nanny, “though I never did like those sisters, I’ll tell you.”
Elphie clenched her fists and tried to keep from striking herself. “Liir gone too,” she said. “I
came here to make my apologies to Sarima, and I lost Liir in the bargain. Am I good for nothing in
this life?”
Kiamo Ko was deathly still, except for old Nanny’s labored breathing as she took a catnap in
her rocking chair. Killyjoy thumped his tail on the floor, happy to see his mistress. The sky was
broad and hopeless beyond the windows. Elphaba was tired herself, but she couldn’t sleep. For,
from time to time, she imagined she could hear the sound of water lapping against the sides of the
fishwell, as if the legendary underground lake were rising to drown them all.

Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West

Book 5 - The Murder and Its Afterlife
Afterward, there was a lot of discussion about what people had thought it was. The noise had
seemed to come from all corners of
the sky at once.
Journalists, armed with the thesaurus and apocalyptic scriptures, fumbled and were defeated by
it. “A gulfy deliquescence of deranged and harnessed air” A volcano of the invisible, darkly
construed” To the pleasure faithers with tiktok affections, it was the sound of clockworks uncoiling their
springs and running down at a terrible speed. It was the release of vengeful energy.
To the essentialists, it seemed as if the world had suddenly found itself too crammed with life,
with cells splitting by the billions, molecules uncoupling to annihilation, atoms shuddering and
juggernauting in their casings.
To the superstitious it was the collapsing of time. It was the oozing of the ills of the world into
one crepuscular muscle, intent on stabbing the world to its core for once and for all.
To the more traditionally religious it was the blitzkrieg of vengeful angel armies, the awful
name of the Unnamed God sounding itself at last-surprise-and the evaporation of all hopes for mercy.
One or two pretended to think it was squadrons of flying dragons overhead, trained for attack,
breaking the sky from its moorings by the thrash of tripartite wings.
In the wake of the destruction it caused, no one had the hubris or courage (or the prior
experience) to lie and claim to have known the act oi terror for what it was: a wind twisted up in a
vortical braid.
In short: a tornado.
The lives of many Munchkinlanders were lost-along with square miles of topsoil from hundred
of years of cultivation. The shifting margins of sand in the eastern desert covered several villages
without a trace, and no survivors were left to tell the tale of their suffering. Whirling like something
from a nightmare, the wind funnel drove into Oz thirty miles north of Stonespar End, and delicately
maneuvered around Colwen Grounds, leaving every rose petal attached and every thorn in place.
The tornado
sliced through the Corn Basket, devastating the basis of the economy of the renegade nation, and
petered out, as if by design, not only at the eastern terminus of the largely defunct Yellow Brick
Road, but also at the precise spot-the hamlet of Center Munch-where, outside a local chapel,
Nessarose was awarding prizes for perfect attendance at religious education classes. The storm
dropped a house on her head.
All the children survived to pray for Nessarose’s soul at the memorial service. Perfect
attendance was never more perfect.
There were a great many jokes about the disaster, naturally. “You can’t hide from destiny,”
some said, “that house had her name on it.” “That Nessarose, she was giving such a good speech
about religious lessons, she really brought down the house!” “Everybody needs to grow up and leave
home sometimes, but sometimes HOME DOESN’T L1KE FE.” “What’s the difference between a
shooting star and a falling house?” “One which is propitious grants delicious wishes, the other which
is vicious squishes witches.” “What’s big, thick, makes the earth move, and wants to have its way
with you?” “I don’t know, but can you introduce me?”
Such a maelstrom had not been known in Oz before. Various terrorist groups claimed credit,
especially when news got around that the Wicked Witch of the East-also known as the Eminent
Thropp, depending on your political stripe-had been snuffed out. It was not widely understood at

first that the house carried passengers. The mere presence of a house of exotic design, set down
almost intact upon the platform rigged up for the visiting dignitaries, was stretching credulity enough.
That creatures might have survived such a fall was either patently unbelievable or a clear indication
of the hand of the Unnamed God in the affair. Predictably, there were a few blind people who
suddenly cried “I can see!” a lame Pig that stood and danced a jig, only to be led away-that sort of
thing. The alien girl-she called herself Dorothy-was by virtue of her survival elevated to living
sainthood. The dog was merely annoying.
When the news of Nessarose’s premature death arrived at Kiamo Ko by carrier pigeon, the
Witch was deep in an operation of sorts, stitching the wings of a white-crested male roc into the
back mus
des of one of her current crop of snow monkeys. She had more or less perfected the procedure,
after years of botched and hideous failures, when mercy killing seemed the only fair thing to do to the
suffering subject. Fiyero’s old schoolbooks in the life sciences, from Doctor Nikidik’s course, had
given some leads. Also the Grimmerie had helped, if she was reading it correctly: She had found
spells to convince the axial nerves to think skyward instead of treeward. And once she got it right,
the winged monkeys seemed happy enough with their lot. She had yet to see a female monkey in her
population produce a winged baby, but she still had hopes.
Certainly they had taken better to flying than they had to language. Chistery, now a patriarch in
the castle menagerie, had plateaued at words of one syllable, and still seemed to have no clear idea
of what he was saying.
It was Chistery, in fact, who brought the pigeon’s letter in to Elphaba’s operating salon. The
Witch had him hold the fascia-slasher while she unfolded the page. Shell’s brief message told of the
tornado and informed her of the memorial service, which was scheduled for several weeks later in
the hope that she would receive this message in time to come.
She put the message down and went back to work, placing grief and regret away from her. It
was a tricky business, wing attachment, and the sedative she had administered to this monkey
wouldn’t last all morning.
“Chistery, it’s time to help Nanny down the stairs, and find Liir if you can, and tell him I need to
talk to him at lunch,” she said, through her gritted teeth, glancing again at her own diagrams to make
sure she had the overlapping of muscle groups in the correct arrangement, front to back.
It was an achievement if Nanny could now make it to the dining room once a day. “That’s my
job, that and sleeping, and Nanny does both very well,” she said every single noontime when she
arrived, hungry from her exertions on the stairs. Liir put out the cheese and bread and the occasIonal
cold joint, at which the three of them hacked and nibbled, usually in an unsocial mood, before darting
off to their afternoon chores.
Liir was fourteen, and insisted he was going to accompany the Witch to Colwen Grounds. “I
have never been anywhere, except that time with the soldiers,” he complained. “You never let me do
anything.”
“Someone has to stay and take care of Nanny,” said the Witch. “Now there isn’t any point in
arguing about it.”
“Chistery can do it.”
“Chistery can’t. He’s getting forgetful, and between him and Nanny they’d burn the place to the
ground. No, there’s no more discussion about it, Liir; you’re not going. Besides, I’m going to have to
travel on my broom, I think, to get there in time.”
“You never let me do anything.”
“You can do the washing up.”
“You know what I mean.”

“What’s he arguing about now, sweet thing?” asked Nanny loudly.
“Nothing,” said the Witch.
“What’s that you say?”
“Nothing.”
“Aren’t you going to tell her?” said Liir. “She helped raise Nessarose, didn’t she?”
“She’s too old, she doesn’t need to know. She’s eighty-five, it’ll only upset her.”
“Nanny,” said lAir, “Nessie’s dead.”
“Hush, you useless boy, before I remove your testicles with my foot.”
“Nessie did what?” screeched Nanny, looking rheumily out at them.
“Did died dead,” intoned Chistery.
“Did what?”
“Nessie DIED,” said Liir.
Nanny began to weep at the idea before she had even confirmed it. “Can this be true, Elphie? Is
your sister dead?”
“Liir, you’ll answer for this,” said the Witch. “Yes, Nanny, I cannot lie to you. There was a
storm and a building collapsed. She went very peacefully, they say.”
“She went straight to the bosom of Lurlina,” said Nanny, sobbing. “Lurlina’s golden chariot
came to take her home.” She patted the piece of cheese on her plate, inexplicably. Then she buttered
a napkin and took a bite. “When do we leave for the funeral?”
“You’re too old to travel, dear. I’m going in a few days. Liir will stay and look after you.”
“I wIll not,” said Liir.
“He’s a good boy,” said Nanny, “but not as good as Nessarose. Oh, sorrowful day! Liir, I’ll
take my tea in my room, I can’t sit and talk to you
335
as if nothing’s happened.” She hauled herself to her feet, leaning on Chistery’s head. (Chistery
was devoted to her.) “You know, darling,” she said to the Witch, “I don’t think the boy is old enough
to see to my needs. What if the castle is attacked again? Remember what happened the last time you
went away.” She made a small, accusatory moue.
“Nanny, the Arjiki militia guard this place day and night. The Wizard’s army is well housed in
the town of Red Windmill down below. They have no intention of leaving that safe haven and risking
decimation in these mountain passes-not after what they did. That was their skirmish, that was their
campaign. Now they’re just watchdogs. They staff the outpost to report signs of an invasion or
trouble from the mountain clans. You know that. You have nothing to fear.”
“I’m too old to be taken in chains like poor Sarima and her family,” Nanny said. “And how
could you rescue me, if you couldn’t get them back?”
“I’m still working on that,” said the Witch into Nanny’s left ear.
“Seven years. You’re very stubborn. It’s my opinion they’re all moldering in a common grave,
these seven long years. Liir, you have to thank Lurlina that you weren’t among them.”
“I tried to rescue them,” said Liir stubbornly, who had rewritten the escapade in his own mind
to give himself a more heroic role. It was not longing for the companionship of soldiers, he told
himself, no, it was a courageous effort to save the family! In fact, Commander Cherrystone out of
kindness had had Liir tied up and left him in a sack in someone’s barn, to prevent their having to
incarcerate him with the others. The Commander had not realized Liir was a bastard son of Fiyero,
for Liir himself didn’t know it.
“Yes well, that’s a good boy.” Nanny was now distracted from the sad news, drifting back to
the tragedy she remembered more viscerally. “Of course I did everything I could, but Nanny was an
old woman even then. Elphie, do you think they’re dead?”

“I could find out nothing,” said the Witch for the ten thousandth time. “If they were spirited to
the Emerald City or if they were murdered, I could not tell. You know this, Nanny. I bribed people. I
spied around. I hired agents to follow every lead. I wrote to the Princess Nastoya of the Scrow for
advice. I spent a year following every useless clue. You know this. Don’t torture me with the
memory of my failure.”
“It was my failure, I’m sure,” said Nanny peacefully; they all knew
she didn’t think so for a minute. “I should have been younger and more vigorous. I’d have given
that Commander Cherrystone a piece of my mind! And now Sarima is gone, gone, and her sisters too.
I suppose it’s none of our fault, really,” she concluded disingenuously, scowling at the Witch. “You
had someplace to go, so you went; who can criticize you for that?”
But the Image of Sarima in chains, Sarima as a decaying corpse, still withholding from the
Witch her forgiveness for Fiyero’s death-it pained her like water. “Give up, you old harridan,” said
the Witch, “must my own whip me so? Go have your tea, you fiend.”
The Witch sat down at last and thought of Nessarose, and what might come. The Witch had tried
to stay removed from the affairs of the political world, but she knew a change of leadership in
Munchkinland could throw things out of balance-maybe to a positive effect. She felt a guilty lightness
at the death of her sister.
She made a list of things to bring with her to the memorial service. Foremost was a page of the
Grimmerie. In her chamber she pored over the huge musty tome, and finally she ripped out an
especially cryptic page. Its letters still continued to contort beneath her eyes, sometimes scrambling
and unscrambling as she looked, as if they were formed by a colony of ants. Whenever she gazed at
the book, meaning might emerge on a page that a day earlier had been illegible chicken scratches;
and meaning sometimes disappeared as she stared. She would ask her father, who with his holy eyes
would see the truth better.
Colwen Grounds was draped in black swags and purple bunting. When the Witch arrived, she
was greeted by a one-man less-than-welcoming committee, a bearded Munchkinlander named Nipp,
who seemed to be concierge, janitor, and acting Prime Minister. “Your lineage no longer allows you
any particular liberties in Munchkinland,” she was told. “With the death of Nessarose, the honorific
of Eminence is at last abolished.” The Witch didn’t much care, but she wasn’t inclined to accept a
unilateral dictum without a retort. She answered, “It is abolished when I accept that it is abolished.”
Not that the honorific had been used much in recent years; according to the occasional rambling letter
from Frex,
Nessarose had begun to be amused by the slur of “Wicked Witch of the East,” and had
considered it a public penance worthy of a person with such high moral standing. She even took to
referring to herself as such.
Nipp showed her to her room. “I don’t need much,” said the Wicked Witch of the West (as, in
contrast, she allowed herself to be called, at least by these Munchkinlander upstarts). “A bed for a
couple of days, and I’d like to see my father and attend the service. I’ll collect a few things, and be
off soon. Now, do you know if our brother, Shell, will be here?”
“Shell has disappeared again,” said Nipp. “He left his regards. There is a mission he is
undertaking in the Glikkus, it can’t wait. Some of us think he is defecting, worried about a change in
government here now that the tyrant is dead. As well he might,” he added coldly. “Have you fresh
towels?”
“I don’t use them,” said the Witch, “it’s all right. Go away now.” She was very tired, and sad.
At sixty-three, Frex was even balder, and his beard whiter, than he had been last time. His
shoulders hunched in, as if trying to meet each other, his head sank into a natural cavity made by a
deteriorating spine and neck. He sat covered by a blanket on the verandah. “And who is this,” he

said when the Witch came up and sat next to him. She realized his sight had nearly gone for good.
“It’s your other daughter, Papa,” she said, “the one that’s left.”
“Fabala,” he said, “what will I do without my pretty Nessarose? How will I live without my
pet?”
She held his hand until he fell asleep, and wiped his face though his tears burned her skin.
The liberated Munchkinlanders were destroying the house. The Witch had no use for frippery,
but it seemed a shame to waste a property this way. Desecration was so shortsighted; didn’t they
know that, however they now decided to live, Colwen Grounds could be their parliament building?
She spent time with her father, but they didn’t speak much. One morning, when he was more
alert and energetic than usual, he asked her if she really was a witch. “Oh well, what’s a witch? Who
has ever trusted language in this family?” she replied. “Father, will you look at something
for me? Will you tell me what you see?” She withdrew from an inner pocket the page from the
Grimmerie and she unfolded it like a large napkin on his lap. He ran his hands over it, as if he could
pick up meaning through his fingertips, and then held it near, peering and squinting.
“What do you see?” she asked. “Can you tell me the nature of this writing? Is it for good or for
ill?”
“The markings are crisp enough, and large. I ought to be able to make it out.” He turned it
upside down. “But little Fabala, I can’t read this alphabet. It is in a foreign tongue. Can you?”
“Well, sometimes I seem to be able to, but the talent is fleeting,” said the Witch. “I don’t know
If it’s my eyes or if it’s the manuscript that’s being tricky.”
“You always had strong eyes,” said her father. “Even as a toddler you could see things no one
else could.”
“Hah,” she said, “I don’t know what you mean.”
“You had a looking glass that sweet Turtle Heart made for you, and you looked in it as if you
could see other worlds, other times.”
“I was probably looking at myself.”
But they both knew that wasn’t true, and Frex, for once, said so. “You didn’t look at yourself,”
he said, “you hated to. You hated your skin, your sharp features, your strange eyes.”
“Where did I learn that hate?” she asked.
“You were born knowing it,” he said. “It was a curse. You were born to curse my life.” He
patted her hand affectionately, as if he didn’t mean much by this. “When you lost your weird baby
teeth, and your second teeth came in normally, we all relaxed a little. But for the first couple of
years-until Nessarose was born-you were a little beast. Only when saintly Nessarose was delivered
to us, even more scarred than you, did you settle down like a normal child.”
“Why was I cursed to be different?” she said. “You are a holy man, you must know.”
“You are my fault,” he said. Despite his words he was somehow pinning blame on her instead
of himself, though she still wasn’t clever enough to see how this was done. “For what I had failed to
do, you were born to plague me. But don’t worry yourself about it now,” he added, “that’s all long
ago.”
“And Nessarose?” she asked. “How do the weights and balances of shame and guilt account for
her?”
“She is a portrait of the lax morals of your mother,” Frex said calmly.
“And that’s why you could love her so much,” said the Witch. “Because her human frailty
wasn’t your fault.”
“Don’t stew so, you always stewed,” Frex said. “And now she is dead, so what does it
matter?”
“My life is still running on.”

“But mine is running out,” he answered, sadly. So she put his hand back on his lap, and kissed
him gently, and folded up the page of the Grimmerie and tucked it in her pocket. Then she turned to
greet the person approaching them across the lawn. She thought it was someone with tea (Frex was
still accorded a measure of service, due to his age and his mildness, and, she supposed, his
vocation), but she stood and pressed down the front of her homespun black skirt when she saw who
it was.
“Miss Glinda of the Arduennas,” she said, her heart churring.
“Oh, you came, I knew you would,” said Glinda. “Miss Elphaba, the last true Eminent Thropp,
no matter what they say!”
Glinda approached slowly, either through age or shyness, or because her ridiculous gown
weighed so much that it was hard for her to get up enough steam to stride. She looked like a huge
Glindaberry bush, was all the Witch could think; under that skirt there must be a bustle the size of the
dome of Saint Florix. There were sequins and furbelows and a sort of History of Oz, it seemed,
stitched in trapunto in six or seven ovoid panels all around the skirting. But her face: beneath the
powdered skin, the wrinkles at eyelid and mouth, was the face of the timid schoolgirl from the Pertha
Hills.
“You haven’t changed a whit,” said Glinda. “Is this your father?”
The Witch nodded but shushed her; Frex had dropped off again. “Come, we’ll walk in the
gardens before they root up the roses out of some beknighted attempt at eradicating injustice.” The
Witch took Glinda’s arm. “Glinda, you look hideous in that getup. I thought you’d have developed
some sense by now.”
“When in the provinces,” she said, “you have to show them a little style. I don’t think it’s so
bad. Or are the satin bells at the shoulder a bit too too?”
“Excessive,” agreed the Witch. “Someone get the scissors; this is a disaster.”
They laughed. “My dear, what they’ve done to this grand old place,” said Glinda. “Look, those
pediments are meant to support graven urns, and those revolutionary slogans are painted all over that
exquisite belvedere. I hope you’ll have something done, Elphie. There isn’t a belvedere to match that
outside of the capital.”
“I never had the love of architecture that you did, Glinda,” said the Witch. “I just read the
slogans: SHE WALKED ALL OVER us. Why shouldn’t they paint all over her belvedere? If she did
in fact walk all over them?”
“Tyrants come and go, belvederes are forever,” said Glinda. “I can recommend topnotch
restorers the moment you ask.”
“I hear you were one of the first on the scene,” said the Witch, “when Nessarose died. How did
that come to be?”
“Sir Chuifrey-my hubby-he has some investments in pork futures, you know, and Munchkinland
is trying to diversify its economic base so as not to be at the mercy of Gillikin banks and the Emerald
City Corn Exchange. You never know what relationship might develop between Munchkinland and
the rest of Oz, and it’s best to be prepared. So where Sir Chuifrey does business, I do good. It’s a
partnership made in heaven. You know I have more money than I can give away?” She giggled and
squeezed the Witch’s arm. “I never imagined that doing public charity would provide such a rush.”
“So you were here in Munchkinland-?”
“Yes, I had been at an orphanage on the shores of Mossmere, and for a lark I thought I’d go to
the game park-they have dragons there now, and I’d never seen a dragon-so I was scarcely a dozen
miles away when the storm hit. We had terrible winds even there; I cannot imagine how a ceremony
could have been in progress in Center Munch. In Mossmere there were whole sections of the park
closed to visitors due to the fear of falling trees and escaping Animals-“

“Oh, so they call it a game park, with Animals?” said the Witch.
“You must go, dear, it’s a lark. Well, as I was saying, the house came right out of the blue, and I
suppose I mean that literally-if they’d sensed a big storm, they’d surely have canceled the event and
run for cover. Anyway, the news system is very advanced now in parts of
Munchkinland; Nessarose herself oversaw a system of beacons and tiktok code signals, to warn
of invasions from the Wizard and points west. So it was only a matter of minutes before the news
was being flashed in all directions. I commandeered a Mature Pfenix and asked her to bring me to
Center Munch, and I arrived before most of the locals had quite figured out what had hit them.”
“Tell me about it,” said the Witch.
“You’ll be pleased to hear there was no blood. I venture to guess there were massive internal
injuries, but there was no blood. Of course Nessarose’s last few devoted followers thought this
meant her spirit was taken up intact, and that she suffered little. I don’t imagine she suffered much,
not with that kind of clonk on the noggin. Her more unhappy subjects, who were the greater in
number, thought it a droll act of Lurlina, releasing them from Nessarose’s particular sort of
fundamentalist bondage. There was revelry when I arrived, and much feting of the funny girl and the
dog who seem to have lived in the house.”
“Oh, who’s that?” said the Witch, who hadn’t heard this part.
“Well, you know how Munchkinlanders bow and scrape no matter what their democratic
inclinations. No sooner had I arrived than they deferred to me, introducing me as a witch. I tried to
correct them, a sorceress is really much more apt, but never mind. It was no doubt the outfit, it
cowed them. I was in a salmon-pink fantasy that day, and really it suited me.”
“Go on,” said the Witch, who had never liked talking about clothes.
“Well, the child introduced herself: Dorothy from Kansas. I didn’t know the place, and said as
much. She appeared as much surprised as anyone else about what had happened, and she had a nasty
little pooch yapping about her heels. Tata or Toto or something. Toto. So this Dorothy was in some
state of shock, I can tell you. A fairly homely little girl with little fashion sense, but I suppose that
comes later in life for some than others.” She glanced sideways at the Witch. “Much later, in some
cases.” And they both chuckled at that.
“Dorothy supposed she should try to get back to her home, but as she couldn’t remember having
studied anything about Oz in school, nor could I recall a place named Kansas, we decided that she
should look for help elsewhere. The fickle MunchkInlanders seemed ready to nominate her as
Nessie’s successor, which would have angered Nipp and all those
ministers in Coiwen Grounds who’ve spent their careers jockeying for position when and if
Nessarose ever saw fit to die. Besides, there may be other developments afoot. Dorothy might have
gotten in the way.”
“An eye to public affairs, well, somehow I’m not surprised,” said the Witch, in fact quite
pleased. “I always knew you were in there somewhere, Glinda.”
“Well, I thought the better move would be to get Dorothy out of Munchkinland before a civil
war tore this place up even worse than it already is. There are factions, you know, who support the
re-annexation of Munchkinland by 0z. It would do the girl no good to get caught in the crossfire of
opposing interests.”
“Oh, so she’s not here,” said the Witch. “I had thought I’d meet her.”
“Dorothy? Now you’re not going to take against her, are you?” said Glinda. “She’s a child,
really. Big by Munchkinlander standards, of course, but a squat little thing nonetheless. She’s an
innocent, Elphie; I can see by the gleam in your eye that you’re up to your old paranoia thing again.
She wasn’t piloting that house, you know, she was trapped in it. This would be one struggle you’d do
well just to leave alone.”

The Witch sighed. “You may be right. You know, I’m getting used to stiff muscles in the
morning. Sometimes I think that vengeance is habit forming too. A stiffness of the attitude. I keep
hoping that the Wizard will be toppled in my lifetime, and this aim seems to be at odds with
happiness. I suppose I can’t take on avenging the death of a sister I didn’t get on all that well with
anyway.”
“Especially if the death is an accident,” Glinda said.
“Glinda,” said the Witch, “I know you must remember Fiyero, and you have heard of his death.
Fifteen years ago.”
“Of course,” said she. “Well, I heard he died, under mysterious circumstances.”
“I knew his wife,” said the Witch, “and his in-laws. It was suggested to me once that he had
been carrying on an affair with you in the Emerald City.”
Glinda turned yellow-pink. “My dear,” she said, “I was fond of Fiyero and he was a good man
and a fine statesman. But among other things, you will remember he was dark-skinned. Even if I took
up dal
liances-an inclination I believe rarely benefits anyone-you are °nce again being suspicious and
cranky to suspect me and Fiyero! The idea!”
And the Witch realized, sinkingly, that this was of course true; the ugly skill at snobbery had
returned to Glinda in her middle years.
But for her part, Glinda had no real iniding that the Witch was implicating herself as FIyero’s
adulterous lover. Glinda was too fussed to listen that closely. The Witch in fact alarmed her a little.
It was not just the novelty of seeing her again, but the strange charisma Elphaba possessed, which
had always put Glinda in the shade. Also there was the thrill, basis indeterminable, which made
Glinda shy, and caused her to rush her words, and to speak in a false high voice like an adolescent.
How quickly you could be thrown back to the terrible uncertainty of your youth!
For when she chose to remember her youth at all, she could scarcely dredge up an ounce of
recollection about that daring meeting with the Wizard. She could recall far more clearly how she
and Elphie had shared a bed on the road to the Emerald City. How brave that had made her feel, and
how vulnerable too.
They walked for a way In a restless silence.
“Things might begin to improve now,” said the Witch after a time. “I mean Munchkinland will
be a mess for a while. A tyrant is terrible, but at least he or she imposes order. The anarchy that
follows the deposition of a tyrant can be bloodier than before. Still, things may work out all right.
Father always said that when left to themselves, the Munchklnlanders had a great deal of common
sense. And Nessie was, for all practical purposes, a foreigner. She was raised in Quadling Country,
and you know, she may have been half Quadling herself, I’ve come to realize. She was a foreign
queen on this soil, despite her inherited title. With her gone, the Munchkinlanders might just right
themselves.”
“Bless her soul,” said Glinda. “Or do you still not believe in the soul?”
“I can make no comment on the souls of others,” said the Witch.
They walked some more. Here and there the Witch saw, as before, the totemic straw men,
pinned to tunics, and erected like effigies in the corners of fields. “I find them somewhat creepy,”
she said to Glinda. “Now one other thing I want to ask you; I asked this of Nessa once. Do you
remember Madame Momble’s corralling us into her parlor, and
proposing we become three Adepts, three high witches of Oz? Sort of secret local priestesses,
shaping public policy behind the scenes, conujbuting to the stability-or instability-of Oz as required
by some unnamed higher authority?”
“Oh, that farce, that melodrama, how could I forget it?” said Glinda. “I wonder if we were put

under a spell then? Do you remember, she
paid we couldn’t talk about it, and it didn’t seem that we could?”
“Well we are talking about it, so if there was any truth to it, which I doubt, it’s certainly worn
off by now.”
“But look what’s happened to us. Nessarose was the Wicked
Witch of the East-you know that’s what they called her, don’t pretend to be so shocked-and I
have a stronghold in the West, and I seem to have rallied the Arjikis around me, by dint of the
absence of their ruling family-and there you are, sitting pretty in the North with your bank accounts
and your legendary skills at sorcery.”
Legendary nothing I simply see to it that I am admired in the right circles,” said Glinda. “Now,
my memory is just as good as yours. And
Madame Morrible proposed that I be an Adept of Gillikin, but that you be an Adept of
Munchkinland, and Nessa be an Adept of Quadling
Country. The Vinkus she didn’t think worth bothering about. If she was seeing the future, she got
it wrong. She got you and Nessa all wrong.”
“Forget the details,” said the Witch tartly. “I just mean, Glinda, is it possible we could be
living our entire adult lives under someone’s spell? How could we tell if we were the pawns of
someone’s darker game? I know, I know, I can see it in your face: Elphie,you’re sniffing conspiracy
theories again. Butyou were there. You heard what I heard. How do you know your life hasn’t been
pulled by the strings of some malign magic?”
“Well, I pray a lot,” said Glinda, “not terribly genuinely, I admit, but I try. I think the Unnamed
God would have mercy on me and give me the benefit qf the doubt, and release me from a spell if I
had accidentally fallen under one. Don’t you? Or are you still so atheistic?”
“I have always felt like a pawn,” said the Witch. “My skin color’s been a curse, my missionary
parents made me sober and intense, my school days brought me up against political crimes against
Animals, my love life imploded and my lover died, and if I had any life’s work of my own, I haven’t
found it yet, except in animal husbandry, if you could call it that.”
“I’m no pawn,” said Glinda. “I take all the credit in the world for my own foolishness. Good
gracious, dear, all of life is a spell. You know that. But you do have some choice.”
“Well, I wonder,” said the Witch.
They walked on. Graffiti was splattered on the sides of the granite plinths of statues. NOW
THE SHOE’S ON THE OTHER FOOT. Glinda tchtched. “Animal husbandry?” she said.
They crossed a little bridge. Bluebirds twinkled music above them like a sentimental
entertainment.
“I sent this Dorothy, this girl, on to the Emerald City,” said Glinda. “I told her I’d never seen
the Wizard-well, I had to lie, don’t look at me like that; if I told her the truth about him she would
never have left here. I told her to ask him to send her home. With his reconnaissance spies all over
Oz, and no doubt elsewhere, he has heard of Kansas, I’m sure. Nobody else has.”
“That was a cruel thing to do,” said the Witch.
“She’s such a harmless child, no one should take her seriously,” said Glinda carelessly. “If the
Munchkinlanders started rallying around her, reunification might be a more bloody affair than we all
hope.”
“So you hope for reunification?” muttered the Witch, disgusted.
“You support it?” “Besides,” Glinda went on blithely, “having some motherly instinct somewhere inside this
pushed-up bosom of mine, I gave her Nessa’s shoes as a sort of protection.”
“You what?” The Witch whirled and faced Glinda. For a moment she was dumb with rage, but

only for a moment. “Not only does she come whomping out of the sky and stepping her big clumsy
house all over my sister, but she gets the shoes too? Glinda, those shoes weren’t yours to give away!
My father made them for her! And furthermore, Nessa promised I could have them when she died!”
“Oh yes,” said Glinda in a false calm, surveying the Witch up and down, “and they would make
the perfect accessory for that glass-of-fashion outfit you have on. Come on, Elphie, since when have
you cared about shoes, of all things? Look at those army boots you have on!”
“Whether I’d wear them or not is none of your concern. You can’t go handing out a person’s
effects like that, what right had you? Papa
reshaped those shoes from skills he learned from Turtle Heart. You’ve stuck your fancy wand in
where it wasn’t wanted!”
“I’ll remind you,” said Glinda, “that those shoes were coming apart until I had them resoled,
and I laced them through with a special binding spell of my own. Neither your father nor you did that
much for her. Elphie, I stood by her when you abandoned her in Shiz. As you abandoned me. You
did, don’t deny it, stop those lightning bolt looks at me, I won’t have it. I became her surrogate sister.
And as an old friend I gave her the power to stand upright by herself through those shoes, and if I
made a mistake I’m sorry, Elphie, but I still feel they were more mine to give away than yours.”
“Well, I want them back,” said the Witch.
“Oh, put it behind you, will you, they’re only shoes,” said Glinda, “you’re behaving as if
they’re holy relics. They were shoes, and a bit out of style, truth be told. Let the girl have them. She
has nothing else.”
“Look how the people here thought of them,” said the Witch; she pointed to a stable on which
was scrawled, in broad red letters, WALK ALL
OVER YOU YOU OLD WITCH.
“Please, give it a rest,” said Glinda, “I have such a headache coming on.”
“Where is she?” said the Witch. “If you won’t retrieve them, I’ll get them myself.”
“If I’d known you wanted them,” said Glinda, trying to make things all right, “I’d have saved
them for you. But you have to see, Elphie, the shoes couldn’t stay here. The ignorant pagan
Munchkinlanders-Lurlinists all, once you scratch the skin-they had put too much credit in those silly
shoes. I mean, a magic sword I could understand, but shoes? Please. I had to get them out of
Munchkinland.”
“You are working in collusion with the Wizard to render Munchkinland ready for annexation,”
said the Witch. “You have no agenda of charity, Glinda. At least don’t fool yourself. Or are you
really under some rusty spell of Madame Morrlble, after all this time?”
“I won’t have you snapping at me,” said Glinda. “The girl has left, she’s been on the road for a
week now, she headed west. I tell you, she’s only a timid child, and means no harm. She’d be
distressed to know she’d taken something you wanted. There is no power in them for you, Elphie.”
The Witch said, “Glinda, if those shoes fall into the hands of the Wizard, he’ll use them
somehow in a maneuver to reannex Munchkinland By now they have too much significance to
Munchkinlanders. The Wizard mustn’t have those shoes!”
Glinda reached out and touched the Witch’s elbow. “They won’t make your father love you any
better,” she said.
The Witch pulled back. They stood glaring at each other. They had too much common history to
come apart over a pair of shoes, yet the shoes were planted between them, a grotesque icon of their
differences. Neither one could retreat, or move forward. It was silly, and they were stuck, and
someone needed to break the spell. But all the Witch could do was insist, “I want those shoes.”
At the memorial service, Glinda and Sir Chuifrey perched in the balcony reserved for
dignitaries and ambassadors. The Wizard sent a representative, resplendent in his dress reds with

the emerald cross marking quadrants on his chest, a crew of bodyguards at attention all around him.
The Witch sat below, and did not meet Glinda’s eyes. Frex wept until he brought on an attack of
asthma, and the Witch helped him out a side door, where he could catch his breath.
After the service, the Wizard’s emissary approached the Witch. He said, “You have been
invited to an audience with the Wizard. He is traveling by special diplomatic immunity, via a Pfenix,
to offer his condolences to the family this evening. You will be prepared to meet him at Colwen
Grounds this evening.”
“He can’t come here!” said the Witch. “He wouldn’t dare!”
“Those who now make the decisions think otherwise,” said the emissary. “Be that as it may, he
comes under cover of darkness, and only to speak to you and your family.”
“My father is not up to receiving the Wizard,” said the Witch. “I won’t have it.”
“He will see you, then,” said the emissary. “He insists. He has questions of a diplomatic nature
to put to you. But you are not to make this visit public, or it could go very hard on your father and
your brother.
And on you,” he added, as if that were not already evident.
She considered how she might use this command audience to her own advantage: Sarima, the
safety of Frex, the fate of Fiyero. “I agree,” she concluded. “I will meet him.” And, despite herself,
she was glad for a Moment that Nessarose’s magicked shoes were safely out of the vicinity.
As the vesper bells rang, the Witch was summoned from her room by a Munchkinlander maid.
“You will have to submit to a search,” said the Wizard’s emissary, meeting her in an antechamber.
“You must understand the protocol here.”
She concentrated on her fury as she was probed and prodded by the officers who ringed the
waiting area. “What is this?” they said when they found the page of the Grimmerie in her pocket.
“Oh that,” she said, thinking fast. “His Highness will want to see that.”
“You can bring nothing in with you,” they told her, and they took the page from her.
“By my bloodlines, I can reinstate the office of the Eminent Thropp tonight and have your leader
arrested,” she called after them. “Do not tell me what I can and cannot do in this house.”
They paid her no mind and ushered her into a small chamber, bare but for a couple of
upholstered chairs set upon a flowery carpet. Along the baseboards, dust mice rolled in the draft.
“His Highness, the Emperor Wizard of Oz,” said an attendant, and withdrew. For a minute the
Witch sat alone. Then the Wizard walked into the room.
He was without disguise, a plain-looking older man wearing a high-collared shirt and a
greatcoat, with a watch and fob hanging from a waistcoat pocket. His head was pink and mottled,
and tufts of hair stuck out above his ears. He mopped his brow with a handkerchief and sat down,
motioning the Witch to sit, too. She did not sit.
“How do you do,” he said.
“What do you want with me,” she answered.
“There are two things,” he said. “There is what I had come here to say to you, and then there is
the matter of what you bring to my attention.”
“You talk to me,” she said, “for I have nothing to say to you.”
“There is no point in beating around the bush,” he said. “I would like to know your intentions
about your position as the last Eminence.”
“Had I any intention,” she said, “it would be none of your business.”
“Ah, alas, it is my business, for reunification is under way,” said the Wizard, “even as we
speak. I understand that Lady Glinda, bless her well-meaning foolishness, has sensibly evacuated
both the unfortunate girl and the totemic shoes from the district, which should make annexation less
troublesome. I should like to have those shoes in my possession, to prevent their giving you ideas. So

you see, I need to know your Intentions in the matter. You were not, I take it, in warm sympathy with
your sister’s style of religious tyranny, but I hope you do not intend to set up shop here. If you do, we
must strike a little bargain-something I was never able to do with your sister.”
“There is little for me here,” said the Witch, “and I am not suited to govern anyone, not even
myself, it seems.”
“Besides, there’s the small matter of the army at-is it Red \Vindmill?-the town below Kiamo
Ko.”
“So that’s why they’ve been there all these years,” said the Witch.
“To keep you in check,” he said. “An expense, but there you are.”
“To spite you, I should reclaim the title of Eminence,” said the Witch. “But I care little for these
foolish people. What the Munchkinlanders do now is of no interest to me. As long as my father is left
unharmed. If that is all-“
“There is the other matter,” he said. His manner became more lively. “You brought a page with
you. I wonder where you got it?”
“That is mine and your people have no right to it.”
“What I want is to know where you got it, and where I can find the rest.”
“What will you give me if I tell you?”
“What could you want from me?”
This was why she had agreed to meet him. She drew a deep breath, and said, “To know if
Sarima, Dowager Princess of the Atlikis, is still alive. And where I might find her, and how I might
negotiate her freedom.”
The Wizard smiled. “How all things work together. Now isn’t it interesting that I could guess of
your concern.” He waved a hand.
Unseen attendants outside the open door ushered in a dwarf in clean white trousers and tunic.
No, it wasn’t a dwarf, she saw; it was a young woman crouching. Chains sewn into the collar of
her tunic ran through her clothes to her *nldes, keeping her bent over; the chains were only two or
three feet long. The Witch had to peer to see for sure that it was Nor. She would be sixteen by now,
or seventeen. The age that Elphie had been when she went up to Crage Hall at Shiz.
“Nor,” said the Witch, “Nor, are you there?”
Nor’s knees were filthy and her fingers curled around the links of her bondage. Her hair was cut
short, and welts were visible beneath the patchy tresses. She tossed her head as if listening to music,
but she would not shIft her gaze toward Elphaba.
“Nor, it’s Auntie Witch. I’ve come to bargain for your release, at last,” said the Witch,
improvising.
But the Wizard motioned the unseen attendants to usher Nor out of sight. “I’m afraid that is not
possible,” he said. “She is my protection from you, you see.”
“The others?” said the Witch. “I must know.”
“Everything is undocumented,” said the Wizard, “but I believe Sarima and her sisters are all
dead.”
The Witch’s breath caught in her chest. The last hopes of forgiveness gone!. . . but the Wizard
was continuing. “Perhaps some underling who had no authority in the matter had an appetite for a
bloodbath. It’s so hard to get reliable help in the armed forces.”
“Irji?” said the Witch, gripping her elbows.
“Now he had to die,” said the Wizard apologetically. “He was the next in line to be Prince,
wasn’t he?”
“Tell me it was not brutal,” said the Witch. “Oh, tell me so!”
“The Paraffin Necklace,” admitted the Wizard. “Well, it was a public affair. A statement

needed to be made. There now, against my better judgment, I have told you what you wanted to
know. Now it is your turn. Where can I find the book that this page is from?” The Wizard took the
paper out of his pocket and pressed it out onto his lap. His hands were trembling. He looked at the
page. “A spell for the Administration of Dragons,” he said, wonderingly.
“Is that what it is?” she said, surprised. “I could not be sure.”
“Of course. You must have a hard time making this out,” he said. “You see, it does not come
from this world. It comes from my world.”
He was mad, obsessed with other worlds. Like her father.
“You are not telling the truth,” said the Witch, hoping she was right.
“Oh, what care I for the truth,” he said, “but I am truthful, as it happens.”
“Why would you want that?” said the Witch, trying to buy some time, trying to figure out how
she could barter for Nor’s life. “I don’t even know what it is. I don’t believe you do either.”
“I do,” he said. “This is an ancient manuscript of magic, generated in a world far away from
this one. It was long thought to be merely leg. endary, or else destroyed in the dark onslaughts of the
northern invaders. It had been removed from our world for safety by a wizard more capable than I. It
is why I came to Oz in the first place,” he continued, almost talking to himself, as old men are prone
to do. “Madame Blavatsky located it in a crystal ball, and I made the appropriate sacrifices andarrangements- to travel here forty years ago. I was a young man, full of ardor and failure. I had not
intended to rule a country here, but just to find this document and return it to its own world, and to
study its secrets there.”
“What kind of sacrifices?” she said. “You do not stint from murder here.”
“Murder is a word used by the sanctimonious,” he said. “It is an expedient expression with
which they condemn any courageous action beyond their ken. What I did, what I do, cannot be
murder. For, coming from another world, I cannot be held accountable to the silly conventions of a
naive civilization. I am beyond that lisping childish recital of wrongs and rights.” His eyes did not
burn as he spoke; they were sunk behind veils of cold blue detachment.
“If I give the Grimmerie to you, will you go?” she said. “Give me Nor and take your brand of
evil and leave us alone at last?”
“I am too old to travel now,” he said, “and why should I give up what I have worked for all
these years?”
“Because I will use this book and destroy you with it if you don’t,” she said.
“You cannot read it,” he said. “You are of Oz and you cannot do such a thing.
“I can read more of it than you suspect,” she said. “I do not know what it all means. I have seen
pages about unleashing the hidden energies of matter. I have seen pages about tampering with the
orderly flow of time. I have seen disquisitions about weapons too vile to use, about how to poison
water, about how to breed a more docile population. There are diagrams of weapons of torture.
Though the drawings and the words seem misty to my eyes, I can continue to learn. I am not too old.”
“Those are ideas of great interest to our times,” he said, though he seemed surprised that she
had taken in as much as she had.
“Not to me,” she said. “You have done enough already. If I give it to you, will you surrender
Nor to me?”
“You should not trust my promise,” he said, sighing. “Really, my child.” But he continued to
stare at the page she had handed over to him. “One might learn how to subjugate a dragon to one’s
own purposes,” he mused, and flipped the page over to read what was on the back.
“Please,” she said. “I think I have never begged for anything before in my life. But I beg of you.
It is not right that you should be here. Assuming for a moment you can sometimes tell the truth-go
back to that other world, go anywhere, just leave the throne. Leave us alone. Take the book with you,

do with it what you will. Let me accomplish at least this in my life.”
“In exchange for my telling you about the kith and kin of your beloved Fiyero, you are to tell me
where this book is,” he reminded her.
“Well, I won’t,” she answered. “I have revised my offer. Give me Nor, and I will get you the
Grimmerie. The book is already hidden so deeply that you will never find it. You have not the skill.”
She hoped she was being persuasive.
He stood and pocketed the page. “I shall not have you executed,” he said. “At least, not at this
audience. I will have that book, for here or for there. You cannot bind me to a promise, I am beyond
being bound by words. I will think of what you have said. But meanwhile, I will keep my young
slave-girl at my side. For she is my defense against your anger.”
“Give her to me!” said the Witch. “Now, now, now: Act like a man, not like a mountebank!
Give her to me and I will send you that book!”
“It is for others to bargain,” said the Wizard. Rather than sounding offended, he seemed merely
depressed, as if he were talking to himself instead of to her. “I do not bargain. But I do think I will
wait and see how the reunification with Munchkinland goes, and if you do not interfere, I may be
kindly disposed to think about what you have said. But I do not bargain.”
The Witch breathed in deeply. “I have met you before, you know,” she said. “You once granted
me an interview in the Throne Room, when I was a schoolgirl from Shiz.”
“Is that so?” he said. “Oh, of course-you must have been one of the darling girls of Madame
Morrible. That wonderful aid and helpmeet. In her dotage now, but in her heyday, what she taught me
about breaking the spirits of willful young girls! No doubt, like the rest, you were taken with her?”
“She tried to recruit me to serve some master. Was it you?”
“Who can say. We were always hatching some plot or other. She was good fun. She would
never be as crude as that”-he pointed to the open door through which crouching Nor could still be
seen, humming to herself-“she could manage girl students with much greater finesse!” He was about
to leave the room, but he turned back at the door. “You know, now I remember. It was she who
warned me about you. She told me you had betrayed her, you had rejected her offers. She was the
one who advised me to have you watched. It is because of her that we found out about your little
romance with the diamond-skinned prince.”
“No!”
“So you met me before. I had forgotten. In what form did I appear?” She had to clutch herself to
keep from vomiting. “You were a skeleton with lighted bones, dancing in a storm.”
“Oh, yes. That was clever, that was. Were you impressed?”
“Sir,” she said, “I think you are a very bad wizard.”
“And you,” he answered, stung, “are only a caricature of a witch.”
“Wait,” she called as he headed away through the panel, “wait, please. How will I receive your
answer?”
“I will send a messenger to you before the year is out,” he said. The panel slammed tightly
behind him.
She fell to her knees, her forehead dropping almost to the floor. At her sides her fists clenched.
She had no intention of surrendering the Grimmerie to such a monster, ever. If need be she would die
to keep it
out of his hands. But could she arrange a deception so that he would surrender Nor to her first?
She left a few days later, first making sure that her father was not to be turned out of his room in
Colwen Grounds. He did not want to join her in the Vinkus; he was too old to make the journey.
Besides, he thought that Shell would come back sooner or later looking for him. The Witch knew that
Frex wouldn’t live long, grieving so for Nessarose. She tried to put away her anger at him when she

said good-bye for what she suspected was the last time.
As she strode through the forecourt of Colwen Grounds, she crossed paths once again with
Glinda. But both women averted their eyes and hurried their feet along their opposing ways. For the
Witch, the sky was a huge boulder pressing down on her. For Glinda it was much the same. But
Glinda wheeled about, and cried out, “Oh Elphie!”
The Witch did not turn. They never saw each other again.
She knew that she couldn’t afford the time to mount a full-scale chase against this Dorothy.
Glinda ought to be hiring accomplices to track those shoes down; it was the least she could do, with
her money and her connections. Still, the Witch stopped here and there along the Yellow Brick Road,
and asked those taking an afternoon tipple at a roadside public house if they had seen a foreign girl in
blue and white checks, walking with a small dog. There was some animated discussion as the
patrons of the pub struggled to decide whether the green Witch intended the child harm-apparently
the child had that rare skill of enchanting strangers- but when they had satisfied themselves that no
harm was likely, they responded. Dorothy had come through a few days ago, and it was said that she
had spent the night with someone a mile or two down the road, before continuing on. “The well-kept
house with the yellow domed roof,” they said, “and the minaret-chimney. You can’t miss it.”
The Witch found it, and she found Boq on a bench in the yard, dandling a baby on his knee.
“You!” he said. “I know why you’re here! Milla, look, who’s here,
come quickly! It’s Miss Elphaba, from Crage Hall! In the flesh!”
Milla came, a couple of naked children clutching her apron strings. Flushed from laundry, she
lifted her straggling hair out of her eyes and said, “Oh my, and we forgot to dress in our finery today.
Look who’s come to laugh at us in our rustic state.”
“Isn’t she something!” said Boq fondly.
Milla had kept her figure, though there were four or five offspring in evidence, and no doubt
more out of sight. Boq had gone barrelchested, and his fine spiky hair had grown prematurely silver,
giving him a dignity he had never had as an undergraduate. “We heard about your sister’s death,
Elphie,” he said, “and we sent our condolences to your father. We didn’t know where you were. We
heard you had come here following Nessie’s ascension to governor of Munchkinland, but we didn’t
know where you went back to when you left. It’s good to see you again.”
The sourness that she had felt over Glinda’s betrayal was ameliorated by Boq’s common
courtesy and direct speech. She had always liked him, for his passion and for his sense. “You are a
sight, you are,” she said.
“Rikla, get up off that stool and let our guest have a seat,” said Milla to one of the children.
“And Yellowgage, run to Uncle’s and borrow some rice and onions and yogurt. Hurry now, so I can
start a meal.”
“I won’t be staying, Milla, I’m in a hurry,” said the Witch. “Yellowgage, don’t bother. I’d love
to spend some time, and catch up on all your news, but I’m trying to locate this girl stranger, who
passed by here, someone said, and stayed a night or two.”
Boq shoved his hands in his pockets. “Well, she did that, Elphie. What do you want with her?”
“I want my sister’s shoes. They belong to me.”
Boq seemed as surprised as Glinda had. “You weren’t ever into fancy trappings like society
shoes,” he said.
“Yes, well, perhaps I’m about to make my belated debut in Emerald City society at last, and
have a coming-out ball.” But she was being tart with Boq, and didn’t want that. “It’s a personal
matter, Boq; I want the shoes. My father made them and they’re mine now, and Glinda gave them to
this girl without my permission. And woe betide Munchkinland if they fall into the Wizard’s hands.
What is she like, this Dorothy?”

“We adored her,” he said. “Plain and straightforward as mustard seed. She shouldn’t have any
problems, although it’s a long walk for a child, from here to the Emerald City. But all who see her
are bound to help her, I’d say. We sat up till the moon rose, chatting about her home, and Oz, and
what she might expect on the road. She hasn’t traveled widely before this.”
“How charming,” said the Witch. “How novel for her.”
“Are you brewing one of your campaigns?” said Milla suddenly, cannily. “You know, Elphie,
when you didn’t come back from the Emerald City with Glinda that time, everyone said you’d gone
mad, and had become an assassin.”
“People always did like to talk, didn’t they? That’s why I call myself a witch now: the Wicked
Witch of the West, if you want the full glory of it. As long as people are going to call you a lunatic
anyway, why not get the benefit of it? It liberates you from convention.”
“You’re not wicked,” said Boq.
“How do you know? It’s been so long,” said the Witch, but she smiled at him.
Boq returned the smile, warmly. “Glinda used her glitter beads, and you used your exotic looks
and background, but weren’t you just doing the same thing, trying to maximize what you had in order
to get what you wanted? People who claim that they’re evil are usually no worse than the rest of us.”
He sighed. “It’s people who claim that they’re good, or anyway better than the rest of us, that you
have to be wary of.”
“like Nessarose,” said Milla meanly, but she was telling the truth, too, and they all nodded.
The Witch took one of Boq’s children on her knee and clucked at it absentmindedly. She liked
children no more than she ever had, but years of dealing with monkeys had given her an insight into
the infant mentality she had never grasped before. The baby cooed and wet itself with pleasure. The
Witch handed it back quickly before the wet could soak through her skirt.
“Regardless of the shoes,” said the Witch, “do you think a child like that should be sent
unarmed straight into the jaws of the Wizard? Has she been told what a monster he is?”
Boq looked uncomfortable. “Well, Elphie, I don’t like speaking ill of
the Wizard. I’m afraid there are too many pitchers with big ears in this community, and you
never know who is on what side. Between you and me, I hope Nessa’s death will result in some sort
of a sensible government, but if we are overrun with an invading army in two months I wouldn’t
want it bruited about that I’d been bad-mouthing the invaders. And there are rumors of reunffication.”
“Oh, don’t tell me you’re hoping for that,” she said, “not you too.”
“I’m not hoping for anything, except for peace and quiet,” he said. “I have enough trouble
getting crops out of these rocky fields. That’s what I was in Shiz to learn, do you remember?agriculture. I’ve put the best of my efforts into our small holdings, and we only manage to eke out a
living.”
But he looked rather proud about it, and so did Milla.
“And I guess you have a couple of Cows in your barn,” said the Witch.
“Oh, you’re testy. Of course we don’t. Do you think I could forget what we worked for-you and
Crope and Tibbett and I? It was the high point of a very quiet life.”
“You didn’t have to have a quiet life, Boq,” said the Witch.
“Don’t be superior. I didn’t say I was sorry for it, neither the excitement of a righteous
campaign nor the relief of a family and a farm. Did we ever do any good back then?”
“If nothing else,” said the Witch, “we helped Doctor Dillamond. He was very much alone in his
work, you know. And the philosophical basis for the resistance grew out of his pioneering
hypotheses. His findings outlived him; they still do.” She did not mention her own experiments with
the winged monkeys. Her practical applications were directly derived from Doctor Dillamond’s
theories.

“We had no idea we were at the end of a golden age,” Boq said, sighing. “When’s the last time
you saw an Animal in the professions?”
“Ah, don’t get me started,” the Witch said. She couldn’t stay seated.
“Do you remember, you hoarded those notes of Dillamond’s. You never really let me know
what they were all about. Did you make any use of them?”
“I learned enough from his research to keep questioning,” said the Witch, but she felt
bombastic, and wanted to stop talking. It made her
feel too sad, too desperate. Milla saw this, and with a brusque charity declared, “Those times
are over and gone, and good riddance to them, too. We were hopelessly high-spirited. Now we’re
the thick-waisted generation, dragging along our children behind us and carrying our parents on our
backs. And we’re in charge, while the figures who used to command our respect are wasting away.”
“The Wizard doesn’t,” said the Witch.
“Well, Madame Morrible does,” said Milla. “Or so Shenshen told me in her last letter.”
“Oh?” said the Witch.
“Yes, that’s right,” said Boq. “Though from her bed of pain Madame Morrible continues to
advise our Emperor Wizard on policy matters about education. I’m surprised that Glinda didn’t send
Dorothy to Shiz to study with Madame Morrible. Instead she directed her to the Emerald City.”
The Witch could not picture Dorothy, but for a moment she saw the stooped figure of Nor. She
saw a crowd of girls like Nor, in chains and yokes, drifting around Madame Morrible the way those
schoolgirls had, all those years ago.
“Elphie, sit down again, you don’t look well,” said Boq. “This is a hard time for you. You
didn’t get along well with Nessarose, I seem to remember.”
But the Witch didn’t want to think of her sister. “It’s a rather ugly name, Dorothy,” she said.
“Don’t you think?” She sat back down heavily, and Boq relaxed on a stool a few feet away.
“I don’t know,” he said. “Actually we had a chat about it. She said that the King of her
homeland was a man named Theodore. Her teacher explained that the name meant Gift of God, and
that this was a sign that he was ordained to be King or Prime Minister. Dorothy remarked that
Dorothy was a sort of backward Theodore, but the teacher looked it up and said no, Dorothy meant
Goddess of Gifts.”
“Well, I know what she can give me,” said the Witch. “She can give me my shoes. Are you
trying to say that you think she was a gift of God, or that she is some sort of queen or goddess? Boq,
you used not to go in for superstition.”
“I’m not saying anything of the sort. I’m having a conversation on word derivations,” he
answered calmly. “Let others more enlightened
than I ferret out the hidden meanings of life. But I do think it interesting that her name so
resembles the name of her king.”
Milla said, “Well, I think she’s a holy little girl, ordinary and sanctified just as any child is, no
more no less. Yellowgage, get your paws off that lemon tart, I can see you from here, or I’ll whip
you from now to eternity. The Dorothy child reminded me of what Ozma might have been like, or
might yet be like, if she ever comes out of the deep sleep she’s supposed to be enchanted into.”
“She sounds like a little fright,” said the Witch. “Ozma, Dorothy- all this talk about savior
children. I have always detested it.”
“You know what it is?” said Boq, thinkñ g carefully. “Since we’re talking about the old days, it
comes back to me . . . I wonder if you remember that medieval painting I once found in the library at
Three Queens? The one with the female figure cradling the beast? There was a sort of tenderness and
awfulness in that painting. Well, there’s something in Dorothy that reminds me of that unnamed
figure. You might even call it the Unnamed Goddess-is that sacrilegious or what? Dorothy has this

sweet charity toward her dog, a pretty dreadful little beast. And whiffy? You wouldn’t believe how
repugnant. Once she swooped the dog up in her arms and bent over it, crooning to it, in just the same
pose as that medieval figure. Dorothy is a child, but she has a heaviness of bearing like an adult, and
a gravity you don’t often find in the young. It’s very becoming. Elphie, I was charmed by her, to tell
you the truth.” He cracked a couple of walnuts and eastern macarands, and passed them around. “I
am sure you will be, too.”
“I would like to avoid her at all costs, at the sound of it,” said the Witch. “The last thing I’m in
a mood for these days is to be charmed by juvenile purity. But I insist on recovering my property.”
“The shoes are very magic, are they?” said Milla. “Or is it just symbolic?”
“How do I even know?” said the Witch. “I haven’t ever put them on. But if I could get them and
they could walk me out of this parlous life, I wouldn’t be sorry.”
“Anyway, everyone blamed the shoes for Nessa’s tyranny. I think it’s good of Glinda to have
gotten them out of Munchkinland. The child is smuggling them abroad without even knowing it.”
“Glinda has sent the girl to the Emerald City,” said the Witch
pointedly. “If the Wizard gets hold of them, it’ll be a license to march into Munchkinland. And
you’re fools to sit on the fence as if it makes no difference whether he does or not.”
“You’ll stay for something, at least some tea,” said Milla soothingly. “Look, I’ve had Clarinda
make a fresh pot, and we’ve saffron cream. Remember the saffron cream party after Ama Clutch’s
funeral?”
The Witch breathed heavily for a moment; there was a pain in her esophagus. She did not like to
remember those trying times. And Glinda had known full well that Madame Morrible was behind the
death of Ama Clutch. Now as Lady Glinda she was part of the same ruling class. It was hideous. And
Dorothy, whatever her origins, was still only a child, and they were using her to help rid
Munchkinland of those damned totemic shoes. Or to get the shoes to the Wizard. Just as Madame
Morrible had used her students as Adepts.
“I can’t stop here chattering like an idiot,” she cried, startling them, spilling the bowl of nuts to
the ground. “Didn’t we waste enough time talking ourselves to death in school?” She grabbed for her
broom and her hat.
Boq looked startled and almost fell backward off his seat. “Well, Elphie, why are you taking
offense-?”
She was beyond answering. She whirled in a small cyclone of black skirts and scarves, and ran
out to the road.
She hurried on foot along the Yellow Brick Road, hardly realizing that a plan was forming in
her mind. But she was thinking so hard that for a while she completely forgot she was carrying her
broom, and it was only when she paused to rest, and leaned on it, that she remembered it.
Boq, Glinda, even her father, Frex: how disappointing they all seemed now. Had these folks
deteriorated in virtue since their youth, or had she been too naive then to see them for what they
were? She felt disgusted with people, and longed to be home. She was too out of sorts to seek
lodging in an inn or a public house. It was warm enough to stay outside and rest.
She lay awake at the edge of a field of barley. The moon rose, huge as it sometimes is when
first breaking over the horizon. It backlit a stake with a crossbar, standing as if awaiting a body to
crucify, or a scarecrow to hang.
Why hadn’t she joined forces with Nessarose, and raised armies against the Wizard? Old
family resentments had gotten in the way.
Nessarose had asked for help in governing Munchkinland, and the Witch had denied her
request. Instead the Witch had gone back to Kiamo Ko these seven years. She had squandered the
chance to merge forces with her sister.

Virtually every campaign she’d set out for herself had ended in failure.
She squirmed in the light of the moon, and at midnight, tortured by the thoughts of Nessa’s
death-the physical fact of being squished like a bug finally taking on some imaginative shape in the
Witch’s fantasies- she arose, and took a new path. Dorothy would no doubt follow the Yellow Brick
Road to the Emerald City, and someone as exotic as she could be easily located anywhere along the
route. The Witch would go and try to accomplish the task set out for herself fifteen years ago.
Madame Morrible still waited to be killed.
Shiz was a money factory now. The Colleges, occupying an historic district, remained largely
unchanged, but for some contemporary dormitories and flashy athletic buildings. Outside the
university district, however, Shiz had thrived in the war-alert economy. A huge monument in brass
and marble, The Spirit of Empire, dominated what was left of Railway Square, and the air and light
around it was cut off by hulking industrial buildings, spewing black columns of filth into the air. The
bluestone was now grimestone. The air itself seemed warm and earnest-the ten thousand exhalations
of a city panting every second to increase its wealth. The trees were shriveled and gray. And not a
single Animal in sight.
Crage Hall looked absurdly older and newer at once. The Witch chose not to bother the porter,
and flew herself up over the wall into the kitchen garden, where once Boq had tumbled off an
adjoining roof, almost into her lap. The back lawn beyond the orchard was gone, and in its place
stood a stone structure, above whose gleaming poxite doors was carved THE SIR CHUFFREY
AND LADY GLINDA CONSERVATORY OF MUSIC AND THE THEATRICAL ARTS.
Three girls came hurrying down the path, chattering away, their books clutched close to their
bosoms. They gave the Witch a start, as if they were ghosts of Nessarose, Glinda and herself. She
had to hold on to
her broomstick and steady herself. She had not taken in how far she had come, how much she
had aged.
“I need to see the Head,” she said, startling them.
But one recovered her youthful aplomb and pointed the way. The Head’s office was still in
Main Hall. “You’ll find her in,” they said. “She’s always in at this hour of the morning, having tea by
herself or with contributors.”
Security must be greatly relaxed if none of them questions my being in the kitchen garden,
thought the Witch. All the better; I may even escape unstopped.
The Head had a secretary now, a plump older gentleman with a goatee. “She’s not expecting
you?” he said. “I’ll see if she’s free.” He returned and said, “Madame Head will see you now.
Would you like to kave your broom in the umbrella stand?”
“How kind. No thanks,” said the Witch, and walked through.
The Head rose from a leather armchair. She wasn’t Madame Morrible anymore; she was a
small pinky white woman with copper-colored curls and an energetic manner. “I didn’t catch your
name?” she said politely. “You’re an old girl, but I’m a new one”-she laughed at her own witticism,
and the Witch did not-“and I’m afraid I haven’t yet grasped the truth: dozens of old girls come back
every month to relive the pleasant moments of their growing up here. Please, may I have your name,
and I’ll call for some tea.”
With some effort, the Witch said, “I was called Miss Elphaba when I was here, more years ago
than I realized could be possible. In fact I won’t take tea, I can’t stay long. I was misinformed. I was
hoping to see Madame Morrible? Do you know of her whereabouts?”
“Well, is this good luck or is it bad?” said the current Head. “Up till very recently she has spent
part of every semester in the Emerald City, consulting with His Highness himself, on education
policies through Loyal Oz. But she’s recently returned to her retirement apartment in the Doddery-

I’m sorry, that’s a joke of the girls and it slipped out. It is called the Daughter Building, really, as it
was financed by the generous daughters of Crage Hall, our alums. You see, her health has
deteriorated, and-though I hate to be the bearer of bad tidings-I fear she is very near the end.”
“I’d love to pop in and say hello,” said the Witch. Playacting had never suited her, and it was
only because the new Head was so young, such a fool, such a girl herself, that the Witch could get
away with it. “I was a great favorite of hers, you know; it would give her a wonderful surprise.”
“I’ll call Grommetik to take you there,” said the Head. “But I should ask Madame Morrible’s
nurse first if she’s up to a visit.”
“Don’t call Grommetik, I can find my own way. I will chat with the nurse, and I will only stop
in for a moment. And then I’ll come back here before I leave, I promise, and perhaps I can see my
way clear to making a contribution toward the annual fund, or some little endowment drive you must
be mounting at present?”
To the best of her recollection she had never lied before in her life.
The Doddery was a broad round tower, like a squat silo, sitting adjacent to the chapel in which
Doctor Dillamond had been eulogized. A scout, passing by with buckets and brooms, told the Witch
that Madame Morrible was one flight up, behind the door with the Wizard’s standard mounted on it.
A minute later the Witch stood looking at the Wizard’s standard. A balloon with a basket
beneath it, commemorating his spectacular arrival in the Emerald City, and crossed swords below.
From a few feet away it looked like a huge skull, and the basket a leering jaw, and the crossed
swords a forbidding .IC. The doorknob turned under her tug, and she entered the apartments.
There were several rooms, all cluttered with school memorabilia and tokens of esteem from
various Emerald City institutions, including the Palace of the Emperor. The Witch passed through a
sort of parlor, with a fire burning in it despite the warmth of the season, and a kitchen-scullery area.
To one side was a water closet, and the Witch could hear the sound of someone sobbing inside, and
the blowing of a nose. The Witch pushed a dresser against the door, and continued on into a sleeping
chamber.
Madame Morrible was propped halfway up in a huge bed shaped like a pfenix. A carved gold
pfenix neck and head emerged from the head’ board, and the sides of the bed simulated the bird’s
wings. Its feet joined at the footboard. The idea of its tail feathers had apparently defeated the
ingenuity of the cabinetmaker, for there weren’t any. It was a bird in an awkward position, actually,
as if being blown backward through the air by
The Witch had waited fifteen years, but her timing was oil by five minutes. So the temptation to
go back and dismember Grommetik was intense. But the Witch resisted. She didn’t care if she was
sentenced and executed for the battery of Madame Morrible’s corpse, but she didn’t want to be
caught because of vengeance against a machine.
She took a meal at a caf and glanced at the tabloids. Then she wandered in the shopping
district. Never one for frippery, she was intensely bored, but she wanted to hear them talking about
the death of Madame Morrible. She was waiting for the reviews, as it were. And she would never
come back to Shiz, she suspected, nor to any other city. This was her last chance to see Loyal Oz in
action.
As the afternoon wore on, however, she began to worry. What if there
gunshot, or as if laboring in a human way to deliver itself of the great mound of flesh sitting on
its stomach and reclining against its breast.
On the floor was a pile of the financial papers, and an old-fashioned pair of spectacles was set
on top of them. But the time for reading was past.
Madame Morrible rested in a gray mound, her hands folded upon her belly, and her eyes open
and shallow, without motion. She was still like a mammoth Carp, in all but the fishy smell-a candle

had been so recently lit that the stink of the match’s sulfur still lingered in the room.
The Witch pulled at her broom. From the other room came a pounding on the door of the water
closet. “Did you think you would always be safe by hiding behind schoolchildren?” said the Witch,
beyond herself, beyond caring, and she raised her broom. But Madame Morrible made a sluggish,
indifferent corpse.
The Witch struck Madame Morrible with the flat of the broom, on the side of the head and the
face. It made no mark. Then the Witch searched the mantelpiece for the testimonial trophy with the
biggest marble base, and she bashed in Madame Morrible’s skull with it, with a sound like a
splitting of firewood.
She left it in the old woman’s arms. Its statement could be read by all, except the carved pfenix
who would be looking at it upside down. IN APPRECIATION OF EVERYTHING YOU HAVE
DONE, it said.
was a cover-up? What if the current Head, to avoid scandal, hushed up the news of the assault?
Especially a crime against one so close to the Emperor? The Witch began to fret that she would be
denied the credit for her deed. She racked her brains for someone to confess to, someone who would
be sure to rush to the authorities. What about Crope, or Shenshen, or Pfannee? Or, for that matter, the
Margreave of Tenmeadows, nasty Avaric?
The town house of the Margreave was set out in the deer park at the edge of Shiz. It was late
afternoon by the time she reached the Emperor’s Green, as it was now called. Private residences
were dotted about the expanse, each protected by its own security force, high walls lined with
broken glass bottles, fierce dogs. The Witch had a way with dogs and high walls didn’t bother her.
She welcomed herself over the wall onto a terrace, where a maid tending a floxflower bed had a
conniption and resigned on the spot. The Witch found Avaric in his study, signing some documents
with a huge plumed pen, and sipping some honey-colored whiskey in a crystal glass. “I said that I
won’t come out for cocktails, you’re on your own, can’t you listen?” he began, but then he saw who
it was.
“However did you get in here without being announced?” he said. “I know you. Don’t I?”
“Of course you do, Avaric. I’m the green girl of Crage Hall.”
“Oh yes. What was your name?”
“My name was Elphaba.”
He lit a lamp-the afternoon was darkening, or perhaps clouding over now-and they looked at
each other. “Have a seat, then. I suppose if society forces itself in one’s study door, one has no
further right to deny it. A drink?”
“A wee one.”
Alone of them all, he, who had been too handsome to believe, had grown better looking. He
wore his hair swept back; it was rich and full, the color of polished nickel, and he clearly had the
benefit of a life of exercise and rest, for his figure was strong and slim, his bearing erect, his color
good. Those born with advantages know how to capitalize on them, observed the Witch, after her
first sip.
“To what do I owe this honor?” he said, seating himself across from her with a freshened drink
in his own hands. “Or is the whole world playing reprises today?”
“What do you mean by that?”
“I had a walk at noon,” he said, “in the park, with my bodyguards, as usual. And I came across
a carnival entertainment set up there. It opens tomorrow, I think, and the park will be mobbed with
clever students, household servants and factory workers, and with greasy gabbling families from
Little Glikkus. There were the usual cast of children caught up in the allure of a good circus act,
mostly teenage boys helping out, no doubt having run away from tiresome families and small

provincial towns. But the guy in charge was a bloody little dwarf.”
“Bloody, how do you mean?” asked the Witch.
“I mean offensive, pardon my slang. We’ve all seen dwarves before, that’s not the point. It’s
just that I had seen this very dwarf before. I recognized him from years ago.”
“Fancy that.”
“Well, I wouldn’t have thought anything more of it, but then you show up this afternoon from
more or less the same zone of memory. Weren’t you there, yourself? Didn’t you go with us to the
Philosophy Club that night, we got so drunk, and they had that charmed-sex thing, and that effeminate
Tibbett got so wasted and lost his mind and just about everything else when that Tiger. . . ? You
were there, surely.”
“I don’t think I was.”
“Weren’t you? Boq was, squiggly little Boq, and Pfannee, and Fiyero, I think, and some others.
Don’t you remember? There was that hag who called herself Yackle, and the dwarf, and they let us
in, and they were so creepy? Anyway, doesn’t matter-it’s just-“
“Not Yaclde,” said the Witch. She dropped her drink. “This is insanity, my ears are having
delusions. Everyone is right, I’m paranoid. No, Avaric, I refuse to admit you could remember
someone’s name for twenty years like that.”
“She was a balding gypsy woman with a wig, and sort of chestnutcolored eyes, in thick with
this dwarf. I don’t know what he was called. Why shouldn’t I remember it?”
“You didn’t remember my name.”
“You didn’t scare me half as much. In fact you never scared me.” He laughed. “I was probably
pretty nasty to you. I was an asshole back then.”
“You still are.”
“Well, practice makes perfect, and more than once I’ve been called a perfect asshole.”
“I came by to tell you that I killed Madame Morrible today,” said the \Vitch. She was so proud
of the phrase; it seemed less false when said aloud. Maybe it was true. “I killed her. I wanted
someone who would be believed to know about it.”
“Oh, why ever did you do that?”
“You know, the reasons just reassemble themselves in different patterns every time I think about
It.” She sat up a little straighter. “Because she deserved it.”
“The Avenging Angel ofJustice is now green?”
“A pretty good disguise, don’t you think?” They both grinned.
“So about this Madame Morrible, whom you claim to have killed? Did you know that she
gathered your friends and associates together and gave us a little lecture after you’d run away?”
“You were never my friend.”
“I was too near to be excused. I remember the situation. Nessarose was mortified and shattered
by the whole thing. Madame Morrible took out your records and read to us a profile of your
character as assessed by your various teachers. We were warned about your spikiness, your
frInginess, what were the words they used? I can’t remember that, they weren’t memorable words.
But we were told you might try to recruit us in some sort of juvenile attempt to galvanize some sort
of student uprising. You were to be avoided at all costs.”
“And Nessarose was mortified, well, that figures,” said the Witch grimly.
“Glinda too,” said Avaric. “She went through another slide, like the one she went into after
Doctor Dillamond fell on his magnifying lens-“
“Oh please, is that hoary old lie still in circulation?”
“-oh all right, was brutally murdered by brigands unknown, have it your way. Brigands in the
form of Madame Morrible, that’s what you mean me to suppose. So why really did you do it?”

“Madame Morrible had a choice. No one was better placed than she to see that her students got
an education and not a brainwashing. By hooking up with the Emerald City, she sold out all her
students who believed that a liberal education meant learning to think for themselves.
Besides, she was a vile fiend, and she did conspire to have Doctor Dillamond murdered. No
matter what you say.”
But the Witch stopped herself short, hearing in her words about
Madame Morrible-she had a choice-an echo of what the Elephant
Princess Nastoya had once said to her: No one controls your destiny.
Even at the very worst-there is always choice.
Avaric was rattling on. “And you’ve had her murdered. Two wrongs don’t make a right, as we
boys used to chant on the playground, usually when we were on the ground with someone’s knee on
our groin. Why don’t you stay for a meal? We’ve got guests, a clever bunch.”
“So you can call the police? No thanks.”
“I won’t call the police. You and I, we’re above petulant justice like that.”
The Witch believed him. “All right,” she said. “Who are you married to, by the way? Did you
get married to Pfannee, or Shenshen, or someone else? I can’t remember.”
“Whoever,” said Avaric, pouring another finger of whiskey. “I can’t keep small details in my
mind, never could.”
The Margreave’s pantry was fulsome, his cook a genius, and his wine cellar unparalleled. The
guests tucked into snails and garlic, roast crest of fallowhen with cilantro and clementine chutney,
and the Witch allowed herself a sumptuous helping of lime tart with saffron cream. The crystal
goblets were never empty. The conversation was exalted and loopy, and by the time the Margreavess
led them to the comfortable chairs in the drawing room, the plaster applique on the ceiling seemed to
swirl like the cigarette smoke.
“Why, you’re flushed,” said Avaric. “You ought to have been a tippler all along, Elphaba.”
“I’m not sure red wine agrees with me,” she said.
“You’re in no condition to go anywhere. The maid will do up one of the corner rooms. It’s
lovely, there’s a view clear to the pagoda on the island.”
“I don’t care for prepared views.”
“Don’t you want to wait for the morning papers, to see if they got it right? If they got it at all?”
“I’ll ask you to send me one. No, I must go, I feel the need of some fresh air. Avaric-Madamefriends-it’s been a surprise and I suppose a pleasure.” But she felt grudging as she said it.
“A pleasure to some,” said the Margreavess, who hadn’t approved of the conversation. “I think
it improper to talk about evil all during a meal. It spoils the digestion.”
“Oh, but come,” the Witch said, “is it only in youth that we can have the nerve to ask ourselves
such serious questions?”
“Well, I stick with my suggestion,” said Avaric. “Evil isn’t doing bad things, it’s feeling bad
about them afterward. There’s no absolute value to behavior. First of all-“
“Institutional inertia,” claimed the Witch. “But whatever is the great attraction of absolute
power anyway?”
“That’s why I say it’s merely an affliction of the psyche, like vanity or greed,” said a copper
magnate. “And we all know vanity and greed can produce some pretty astounding results in human
affairs, not all of them reprehensible.”
“It’s an absence of good, that’s all,” said his paramour, an agony aunt for the Shiz Informer.
“The nature of the world is to be calm, and enhance and support life, and evil is an absence of the
inclination of matter to be at peace.”
“Pigspittle,” said Avaric. “Evil is an early or primitive stage of moral development. All

children are fiends by nature. The criminals among us are only those who didn’t progress..
“I think it’s a presence, not an absence,” said an artist. “Evil’s an incarnated character, an
incubus or a succubus. It’s an other. It’s not us.”
“Not even me?” said the Witch, playing the part more vigorously than she expected. “A selfconfessed murderer?”
“Oh go on with you,” said the artist, “we all of us show ourselves in our best light. That’s just
normal vanity.”
“Evil isn’t a thing, it’s not a person, it’s an attribute like beauty . .
“It’s a power, like wind . .
“It’s an infection . .
“It’s metaphysical, essentially: the corruptibility of creation-“
“Blame it on the Unnamed God, then.”
“But did the Unnamed God create evil intentionally, or was it just a mistake in creation?”
“It’s not of air and eternity, evil isn’t; it’s of earth; it’s physical, a disjointedness between our
bodies and our souls. Evil is inanely corporeal, humans causing one another pain, no more no less-“
“I like pain, if I’m wearing calfskin chaps and have my wrists tied behind me-“
“No, you’re all wrong, our childhood religion had it right: Evil is moral at its heart-the
selection of vice over virtue; you can pretend not to know, you can rationalize, but you know it in
your conscience-“
“Evil is an act, not an appetite. How many haven’t wanted to slash the throat of some boor
across the dining room table? Present company excepted of course. Everyone has the appetite. If you
give in to it, it, that act is evil. The appetite is normal.”
“Oh no, evil is repressing that appetite. I never repress any appetite.”
“I won’t have this talk in my drawing room,” said the Margreavess, near tears. “You’ve been
behaving all night as if an old woman hadn’t been slaughtered in her bedclothes. Didn’t she have a
mother too? Didn’t she have a soul?”
Avaric yawned and said, “You’re so tender and naive. When it’s not embarrassing it’s quite
appealing.”
The Witch stood up, sat down quickly, and stood up again, aided by her broom.
“Why did you do it?” asked the hostess with spirit.
The Witch shrugged. “For fun? Maybe evil is an art form.”
But as she wobbled toward the door, she said, “You know, you’re all a pack of fools. You
ought to have turned me in instead of entertaining me all evening.”
“You entertained us,” said Avaric broadly, gallantly. “This’ll end up being the dinner party of
the season. Even if you’ve been lying all evening about killing this old schoolmarm. What a treat.”
The dinner guests drolly applauded her.
“The real thing about evil,” said the Witch at the doorway, “isn’t any of what you said. You
figure out one side of it-the human side, say- and the eternal side goes into shadow. Or vice versa.
It’s like the old saw:
‘What does a dragon in its shell look like? Well no one can ever tell, for as
soon as you break the shell to see, the dragon is no longer in its shell. The real disaster of this
inquiry is that it is the nature of evil to be secret.”
The moon was up again, a little less swollen than the night before. The Witch didn’t trust
herself to ride on the broom, so she meandered in a zigzaggy way across the greensward. She would
find a place to nap outside of the claustrophobia of a society den.
She came upon the construction that Avaric had talked about. It was an old, early tiktok thing, a
sort of portable stupa made of carved wood and figurines, too variegated and numerous for the Witch

to comprehend tonight. Perhaps there was a running board where she could rest underneath, a
platform elevated just a couple of inches off the dampish ground. She peered, and moved forward.
“And where do you think you’re going?”
A Munchkinlander, no, a dwarf, stood in her way. He had a cudgel in one hand, and was
thwacking it into the thick leathery palm of his other hand.
“Going to sleep, when I can,” she said. “So you’re the dwarf, and this is the thing Avaric talked
about.”
“The Clock of the Time Dragon,” he said, “open for business tomorrow night, and not until.”
“I’ll be dead and gone by tomorrow night,” she said.
“No you won’t,” he answered.
“Well, gone anyway.” She looked at it and straightened up, then something came back to her. “I
wonder how you knew Yackle,” she said.
“Oh, Yackle,” he said. “Who doesn’t know Yackle? Not such a surprise.”
“Was she killed today?” said the Witch. “By any chance?”
“No chance,” he answered.
“Who are you?” She was afraid, suddenly, after all this headiness of sorrow and violence.
“Oh, the least significant little one,” he said.
“Who do you work for?”
“Who haven’t I worked for?” said the dwarf. “The devil is a very big
angel, but a very little man. But I have no name in this world, so don’t bother with me.”
“I’m drunk and disorderly,” she said, “and I cannot take any more riddles. I killed someone
today, I can kill you too.”
“You didn’t kill her, she was already dead,” said the dwarf calmly. “And you can’t kill me, for
I’m immortal. But you try very hard at life, and so I will tell you this. I am the guardian of the book,
and I was brought to this dreaded, forsaken land to watch over the book’s history, to keep it from
getting back to where it comes from. I am not good, I am not bad; but I am locked here, condemned to
a deathless life to guard the book. I don’t care what happens to you or anyone else, but I protect the
book: that is my charge.”
“The book?” She was struggling to understand; she felt drunker the more she heard.
“What you call the Grimmerie. It has other names-no matter.”
“Then why don’t you take it, why don’t you have it?”
“I don’t work like that. I am the silent partner. I work through events, I live on the sidelines, I
dabble in causes and effects, I watch how the misbegotten creatures of this world live their lives. I
interfere only to keep the book safe. To some extent I can see what’s coming, and to that extent I
meddle in the affairs of men and beasts.” He jigged like a little fiend. “You see me here, you see me
there. Having second sight is a great advantage in the security business.”
“You work with Yackle.”
“We sometimes have the same intentions, and we sometimes do not. Her interest seems to be
different from mine.”
“Who is she? What is her interest? ‘Why do you hover at the edges of my life?”
“In the world I come from, there are guardian angels,” said the dwarf, “but so far as I can work
it out, she is an opposite number, and her concern is you.”
“Why do I deserve such a fiend? Why is my life so plagued? Who positioned her to influence
my life?”
“There are things I don’t know, and things I do,” said the dwarf. “Who Yacide answers to, if
anyone, if anything, is beyond my realm of knowledge or interest. But why you? You must know this.
For you”-the

dwarf spoke in a bright, offhand tone-“are neither this nor that-or shall I say both this and that?
Both of Oz and of the other world. Your old Frex always was wrong; you were never a punishment
for his crimes. You are a half-breed, you are a new breed, you are a grafted limb, you are a
dangerous anomaly. Always you were drawn to the composite creatures, the broken and
reassembled, for that is what you are. Can you be so dull that you have not figured this out?”
“Show me something,” she said. “I do not know what you mean. Show me something the world
hasn’t shown me yet.”
“For you, a pleasure.” He disappeared, and there was the sound of mechanical parts being
wound up, moving against one another, the grind of lubricated gears, the slap of leather belts, the
chuck-chuck of pendulums swinging. “A private audience with the Time Dragon itself.”
At the top, a beast prowled, flexing its wings in a dance of gestures, both bidding welcome and
holding at bay. The Witch stared.
A small area halfway up was illuminated. “A three-act play,” came the voice of the dwarf, from
deep within. “Act One: The Birth of Holiness.”
Later she could not have said how she knew what it was, but what she saw, in an abbreviated
pantomime, was the life of Saint Aelphaba. The good woman, the mystic and recluse, who
disappeared to pray behind a waterfall. The Witch flinched to see the saint walk straight through the
waterfall (a guttering spout overhead drained real water out into a hidden tray below). She waited
for the tiktok saint to come out, but she didn’t come, and eventually the lights went out.
“Act Two: The Birth of Evil.”
“Wait, the Saint didn’t emerge as the tales say she did,” said the Witch. “I want my money’s
worth or not at all, please.”
“Act Two: The Birth of Evil.”
lights came up on another little stage. There was a credible lIkeness of Coiwen Grounds
painted on a cardboard backdrop beyond. A figurine who was Melena kissed her parents good-bye
and went off with Frex, a handsome little puppet with a short black beard and a jaunty step. They
stopped in a small hut, and Frex kissed her and continued on to preach. All through the rest of the
scene he was off to one side, yammering away to some peasants who were busy screwing each other
on the ground before him, hacking each other to pieces arid eating theIr sexual parts, which ran with
a real gravy; you
could smell the garlic and sauteed mushrooms. Melena, at home, yawned and waited, and
teased her pretty hair. Along came a man whom the Witch could not Identify at first. He had a small
black bag and from it he extracted a green glass bottle. He gave it to Melena to drink, and when she
had, she fell into his arms, either stupefied and drunk as the Witch was tonight, or liberated. It wasn’t
clear. The traveler and Melena made love in the same bouncy rhythm as Frex’s parishioners. Frex
started to dance to the rhythm himself. Then, when the act of love was done, the traveler pulled
himself off Melena. He snapped his fingers, and a balloon with a basket beneath descended from the
fly space above. The traveler got in. It was the Wizard.
“Oh, nonsense,” said the Witch. “This is pure poppycock.”
The lights dimmed. The voice of the dwarf sounded from inside the contraption. “Act Three,”
he said. “The Marriage of the Sacred and the Wicked.”
She waited, but no area was illuminated, no puppet moved.
“Well?” she said.
“Well what?” he answered.
“Where’s the end of the play?”
He stuck his head out of a trap door and winked at her. “Who said the end was written yet?” he
answered, and slammed the door shut. Another door opened, just by the Witch’s hand, and a tray slid

out. Lying on it was an oval looking glass, cracked along one side, scratched on its surfaces. It
looked like the glass she had had since childhood, the one she used to imagine she could see the
Other Land in, back when she believed in such a thing. The last she remembered of the oval glass
was in her hideaway digs in the Emerald City. Inside the glass lived reflections of a young and
beautiful Fiyero, and a young and impassioned Fae. The Witch took the mirror and hid it in her
apron, and wandered away.
There was nothing in the morning papers about the death of Madame Morrible. The Witch, with
a treacherous headache, decided that she could wait no longer. Either Avaric and his beastly
companions would spread the rumors, or they wouldn’t There was nothing left to be done.
Just let word get to the Wizard, though, said the Witch to herself. I would like to be a fly on the
wall of his bunker when that happens. Let him think I killed her. Let that be how the news goes.
She returned to Munchkinland in a punishing journey, exhausting herself. She had slept so little,
and her head still throbbed. But she was proud of herself. She arrived in the front yard of Boq’s
cottage, and called for the family to come.
Boq was out in the field, and one of his children had to be dispatched to fetch hIm. When he
came running, he had an adze in one hand. “I wasn’t expecting you, it took me a minute,” he said,
panting.
“You’d have run quicker if you’d left your blade behind,” she noted.
But he didn’t drop it. “Elphie, why have you come back?”
“To tell you what I have done,” she said. “I thought you would like to know. I have killed
Madame Morrible, and she can no longer harm anyone.”
But Boq did not look pleased. “You took against that old woman?” he said. “Surely she was
beyond the point of hurting anyone now?”
“You’ve made the mistake that everyone makes,” said the Witch, cruelly disappointed. “Don’t
you know there is no such point?”
“You had worked to protect the Animals,” said Boq. “But you did not intend to sink to the level
of those who brutalized them.”
“I have fought fire with fire,” said the Witch, “and I ought to have done it sooner! Boq, you’ve
become an equivocating fool.”
“Children,” said Boq, “run inside and find your mother.”
He was scared of her.
“You’re sitting on the fence,” she said. “Here your precious Munchkinland is going to be
sucked back into the folds of Royal Oz, under His Highness the Emperor Wizard. And you see what
Glinda is up to, and you send that child on her way with the shoes that belong to me. You took a
stand when you were young, Boq! How can you have-spoiled so!”
“Elphie,” said Boq, “look at me. You are beside yourself. Have you been drinking? Dorothy is
just a child. You may not retell this to make her into some sort of fiend!”
Milla, alerted to the tension in the front yard, came out and stood behind Boq. She carried a
kitchen knife. Whispering noisily, the children watched from the window.
“You do not need to defend yourselves with knives and adzes,” said the Witch coldly. “I had
thought you would care to know about Madame Morrible.”
“You are shaking,” said Boq. “Look, I will put down this thing. Clearly you are upset. Nessa’s
death has been hard on you. But you must get control of yourself, Elphie. Don’t take against Dorothy.
She is an innocent creature. She’s all alone. I beg of you.”
“Oh, don’t beg, don’t beg,” said the Witch, “I could not abide begging, from you, of all people!”
She ground her teeth and clenched her fists. “I will promise you nothing, Boq!”
And this time she got on her broom and flew away. Recklessly, she mounted the sides of air

currents, until the ground below had lost any detail sharp enough to cause her pain.
She was beginning to feel too long away from Kiamo Ko. Liir was an idiot, headstrong and lilylivered by turns, and Nanny sometimes forgot where she was. The Witch didn’t want to think about
yesterday, the death of Madame Mornble, the accusations made by the puppet play. She could hardly
be more averse to the Wizard than she already was; if there was a shred of possibility to that sick
idea of his having fathered her, it only made her hate him the more. She would ask Nanny about it
when she got home.
When she got home. She was thirty-eight, and just realizing what it felt like to have a sense of
home. For that, Sarima, thank you, she thought. Maybe the definition of home is the place where you
are never forgiven, so you may always belong there, bound by guilt. And maybe the cost of belonging
is worth it.
But she decided to head toward Kiamo Ko by following the Yellow Brick Road. She would
make one last try for the shoes. She had nothing left to lose. If the shoes fell into the hands of the
Wizard, he would use them to bolster his claim to Munchkinland. Maybe, if she tried, she could
shrug her shoulders and leave Munchkinland to its own fate-but damn it, the shoes were hers.
She finally found a peddler who had seen Dorothy. He stopped by the side of his wagon and
rubbed the ears of his donkey as he discussed it with her. “She passed here a few hours ago,” he
said, chewing on a carrot
and sharing it with the donkey. “No, she wasn’t alone. She had a ragamuffin crew of friends
with her. Bodyguards, I suspect.”
“Oh, the poor frightened thing,” said the Witch. “Who? Munchkinlander beefcake boys, I
wonder?”
“Not exactly,” said the peddler. “There was a straw man, and a tin woodman, and a big cat who
hid In the bushes when I passed-a leopard maybe, or a cougar.”
“A man of straw?” said the Witch. “She’s awakening the figures of myth, she’s charming them
to life? This must be some attractive child. Did you notice her shoes?”
“I wanted to buy them from her.”
“Yes! Yes, did you?”
“Not for sale. She seemed very attached to them. They were given her by a Good Witch.”
“Pigspittle, they were.”
“None of my affair either way,” said the peddler. “Can I interest you in anything?”
“An umbrella,” said the Witch. “I’ve come out without one, and it looks nasty.”
“I remember the good old days of the drought,” said the peddler, fishing out a somewhat worn
umbrella. “Ah, here’s the bumbershoot. Yours for a nickel form.”
“Mine for free,” said the Witch. “You wouldn’t deny a poor old woman in need, would you, my
friend?”
“Not and live to tell about it, I see,” he answered, and went on his way uncompensated.
But as the wagon passed, the Witch heard another voice: “Of course, no one asks a beast of
burden, but it’s my opinion she’s Ozma come out of the deep sleep chamber, and marching on Oz to
restore herself to the throne.”
“I hate royalists,” said the peddler, and lashed out with a crop. “I hate Animals with attitude.”
But the Witch could not stop to intervene. So far she had been unable to save Nor, she had been
incompetent at bargaining with the Wizard. She had been a moment too late to murder Madame
Morrible-or had she been just in time? Either way, she should not try what was clearly beyond her.
The Witch trembled on the lip of an updraft. She had brought the broom higher than ever before;
she was in a state of exhilaration and panic. Should she pursue Dorothy, should she snatch those
shoes away-and what were her real motives? Was it to keep them out of the hands of the Wizard, just

as Glinda had wanted them out of the hands of power-hungry Munchkinlanders? Or was it to snatch
back some small shred of Frex’s attention, whether she had ever deserved it or not?
Beneath the broom, clouds began to gauze the view of rock-freckled hills and patchwork
meadows of melon and corn. The thin twists of vapor looked like the marks of erasure made by a
schoolchild’s rubber, streaking whitely along a watercolor sketch of a landscape. What if she should
just keep on, urging the broom higher, yanking it up? Would it splinter as it beat itself against the
heavens?
She could give up these efforts. She could forsake Nor. She could release Liir. She could
abandon Nanny. She could surrender Dorothy. She could give up the shoes.
But a wind came up, a shoulder of hard air leaning onto her left side. She could not force the
broom against it. She was driven sideways, and down, until the Yellow Brick Road once again
etched a golden thread between forests and fields. There was a storm on the horizon, slotting bars of
brownish rain between lavender-gray clouds and gray-green fields. She hadn’t much time.
Then she thought she caught sight of them below, and dove down to see. Were they stopping to
rest beneath a black willow tree? If so, she could finish things up now.
By the time the storm lifted-and the Witch awoke from what she now identified as a horrible
hangover-she wasn’t sure it was the same day. She wasn’t even sure she had gotten near them-could
she have let them slip through her fingers like that? But whatever the case, delusion or foggy
memory, the Witch didn’t dare follow them into the
379
Emerald City. Madame Morrible had many friends in this rotten regime, and the news would
have gotten through by now. There might even be search parties out for the Witch. So be it.
Though it galled her, for the time being she had to give up on the idea of reclaiming Nessa’s
shoes. She scarcely rested during the entire trip back to Kiamo Ko, except to stop and pick some
berries, and nibble some nuts and sweet roots, to keep her strength up.
The castle had not been burned down. The Wizard’s reconnaissance army was still camped at
its outpost near Red Windmill in a state of bored readiness. Nanny was busy crocheting a pretty
casket cover for her own funeral, and making guest lists. Most of the guests were already in the Other
Land, presuming that for Nanny there was an Other Land. “How nice it would be to see Ama Clutch
again, I quite agree,” shouted the Witch, giving Nanny’s shoulders a squeeze. “I always liked her.
She had more character than that simpering Glinda.”
“You were devoted to Glinda, you were,” said Nanny. “Everyone knew it.”
“Well, no more,” said the Witch. “The traitor.”
“You smell of blood, go wash up,” said Nanny. “Is it your time?”
“I never wash, you know that. Where’s Liir?”
“Who?”
“Liir.”
“Oh, around somewhere.” She smiled. “Look in the fishwell!”
By now an old family joke.
“What new nonsense is this?” said the Witch, finding Liir in the music room.
“They were right all along,” he said. “Look what I finally caught, after all these years.”
It was the golden carp that had long haunted the fishwell. “Oh, I admit that it was dead and I
brought it up with the bucket, not a hook or a net. But even so. Do you think we’ll ever be able to tell
them we finally caught it?”
All these last months he had begun to talk about Sarima and the family as if they were ghosts,
hiding just around the curve of the spiral staircase in the tower, suppressing giggles at this long, long
game of hide-and-seek.

“We can only hope so,” she said. She wondered, faintly, if it was
immoral to raise children in the habit of hope. Was it not, in the end, all the harder for them to
adjust to the reality of how the world worked? “Everything else was all right while I was gone?”
“Just fine,” he said. “But I’m glad you’re back.”
She grunted, and went to greet Chistery and the chattering kin.
In her room she hung the old glass with a cord and a nail, and kept from looking at it. She had
the horrible feeling that she would see Dorothy, and she didn’t want to see her again. The child
reminded her of someone. It was that unquestioning directness, that gaze unblinkered by shame. She
was as natural as a raccoon-or a fern-or a comet. The Witch thought:
Is it Nor? Is it that Dorothy reminds me of how Nor was at this age?
But back then the Witch had not cared for Nor, not really, even though her face had been a
small, velvet reworking of Fiyero’s. Except for Nessarose, and Shell, the Witch had never warmed
to the glowing promise of children. She had always felt more alone in this regard than in her color.
No-and now her glance did fall on the tired old looking glass, despite her intentions. She
thought: the Witch with her mirror. Who do we ever see but ourselves, and that’s the curse-Dorothy
reminds me of myself, at that age, whatever it is . The time in Ovvels. There is the green girl, shy, gawky, and humiliated. To avoid the pain of
damp feet, splashing around in clammy leggings made of swampcalf hide and waterproof boots.
Mama, pregnant with Shell, huge as a barge. Mama praying nonstop for months that she might at last
bring a healthy child into the world. Mama dumping the bottles of liquor and the pinlobble leaves
into the mud.
Nanny tends to little Nessa, papoosing her around in the daily hunt for charfish, needle flowers,
and broad bean vines. Nessa can see but she cannot touch: what a curse for a child! (No wonder she
believed in things she couldn’t see-nothing is provable by touch.) For his atonement, Papa takes the
green girl with him on an expedition to the relatives of Turtle Heart, a many-branched family living
in a nest of huts and walkways suspended in a grove of broad, rotting suppletrees. The Quadlings,
who are more comfortable on their haunches, duck their heads. The smell of raw fish in their homes,
on their skin. They are frightened of the unionist
minister, finding them out in their squalid hamlet. I have no firm memory of individuals, but for
one old matriarch, toothless and proud.
The Quadlings come up, after a period of shyness, not to the minister but to me, the green girl.
She is no longer I, she is too long ago, she is only she, impenetrably mysterious and dense-she stands
as Dorothy stood, some inborn courage making her spine straight, her eyes unblinking. Her shoulders
back, her hands at her side. Submissive to the stroke of their fingers on her face. Unffinching in the
cause of missionary work.
Papa asks forgiveness for the death of Turtle Heart, maybe some five years earlier. He says it is
his fault. He and his wife had both fallen in love with the Quadling glassblower. What can I give you
to make up for it, he says. Elphaba the girl thinks he is mad, she thinks they are not listening, they are
mesmerized by her weirdness. Please forgive me, he says.
The matriarch alone responds to these words; maybe she is the only one who actually
remembers Turtle Heart. She has a look of someone caught venturing out from beneath a rock. Well,
in a people whose moral code is so lax, so little is wrong. For her this encounter is a mysterious,
complicated transaction.
She says something like, We don’t shrive, we don’t shrive, and not for Turtle Heart, no, and she
strikes Papa on the face with a reed, cutting him with thin stripes. I was only a witness, I was not
really alive then, but I saw:
This was when Papa began to lose his way, it dates from this whipping.

I see him shocked: It doesn’t occur in his conception of moral life that some sins are
unforgivable. He blanches, onion white behind the blood-pearled perforations of her attack. Maybe
she has every right to do what she’s done, but in Papa’s life she’s become old Kumbricia.
I see her, willful, proud: Her moral system doesn’t allow for forgiveness, and she is just as
incarcerated as he, but she doesn’t know it. She grins, all gums and menace, and rests the reed on her
collarbone, where its fetching tip falls like a necklace around her own neck.
He points to me, and says-not to me, but to them all-Isn’t this punishment enough?
Elphaba the girl does not know how to see her father as a broken man. All she knows is that he
passes his brokenness on to her. Daily his habits of loathing and self-loathing cripple her. Daily she
loves him back because she knows no other way.
I see myself there: the girl witness, wide-eyed as Dorothy. Staring at a world too horrible to
comprehend, believing-by dint of ignorance and innocence-that beneath this unbreakable contract of
guilt and blame there is always an older contract that may bind and release in a more salutary way. A
more ancient precedent of ransom, that we may not always be tormented by our shame. Neither
Dorothy nor young Elphaba can speak of this, but the belief of it is in both our faces The Witch had taken the green glass bottle, whose label still read MIRACLE ELI-, and placed
it on her bedside table. She took a spoonful of the ancient elixir before sleeping, hoping for miracles,
seeking some version of the fabulous alibi Dorothy was unwinding, that she had come from a country
somehow other-not the real states across the desert, but a whole separate geophysical existence.
Even metaphysical. The Wizard made such a claim for himself, and if the dwarf was right, the Witch
had this ancestry too. At night she tried to train herself to look on the periphery of her dreams, to note
the details. It was a little like trying to see around the edges of a mirror, but, she found, more
rewarding.
But what did she get? Everything ffickered, like a guttering candle but more harshly, more
stridently. People moved in short, jerky motions. They were colorless, they were vapid, they were
drugged, they were manic. Buildings were high and cruel. Winds were strong. The Wizard stepped
in and out of these pictures, a very humble-looking man in this context. In one window, in a shop
from which the Wizard was emerging rather dejectedly, she thought, she caught some words once,
and willed herself with tremendous effort to wake up so she could write them down. But they didn’t
make any sense to her. NO IRISH NEED APPLY.
Then one night she had a nightmare. Again the Wizard began it. He walked over some hills of
sand, with tall gray grasses blowing in a fierce gale-a thousand thousand grasses like the scratchy
sedge with which the old Quadling matriarch had struck Frex-and the Wizard stopped along a broad
flat stretch. He stepped out of his clothes, and looked at a timepiece in his hands, as if memorizing an
historic instant. Then he walked forward, naked and broken. When the Witch realized what he was
approaching, she tried to back out of the dream with a howl, but could not manage to disengage
herself. This was the mythical ocean,
and the Wizard walked into water up to his knees, his thighs, his waist; he paused and shivered,
and slopped water over the rest of himself as a kind of penance. Then he kept walking, and
disappeared entirely into the sea, as Saint Aelphaba of the Waterfall had disappeared behind her
watery veil. The sea rocked like an earthquake, vomiting against the sandy shore, pounding in a
kettledrum commotion. There was no Other Side to it. It threw the Wizard back, again and again,
though again and again he forged in, more and more exhausted. The stoicism, the determination: no
wonder he had managed to overcome a nation. The dream ended with him washed back on shore one
last time, weeping with frustration.
She woke, gagging, terrified beyond telling, salt in her nostrils. Thereafter she avoided the
miracle elixir. Instead, she concocted a potion derived both from Nanny’s recipe book and the

Grimmerie’s marginalia, on how to keep awake. If she fell asleep again, she would be prey to that
vision of earthly destruction, and she would rather die.
Nanny didn’t have very much to say about nightmares. “Your mother had them too,” she
remarked at last. “She used to say she saw the unknown city of anger in her dreams. She was so
enraged over how you turned out, you know-I mean physically, dear, don’t look like that at me: a
green girl isn’t easy for any mother to explain away-that she gulped down those pills like candy
when Nessarose was expected. If Nessarose were still around to take up a grudge, she could blame
you, in a way, for what happened to her.”
“But where did you get that green bottle?” said the Witch into Nanny’s good ear. “Look at it,
Nanny dear, and try to remember.”
“I suspect I bought it at a jumble sale,” she said. “I could stretch a penny, believe me.”
You could stretch the truth even further, thought the Witch. She suppressed a desire to smash the
green glass. How deeply bound by cords of family anger we all are, thought the Witch. None of us
breaks free.
One afternoon a few weeks later, Liir came back from a ramble all hot and bothered. The Witch
hated to hear that he had been hobnobbing again with the Wizard’s soldiers down in Red Windmill.
“They had news, a dispatch from the Emerald City,” he said. “A
delegation of strangers got in to see the Wizard. And just a girl! Dorothy, they said, a girl from
the Other Land. And some friends. The Wizard hasn’t allowed an audience with his subjects in
years-he works through ministers, they say. A lot of soldiers think he died long ago, and it’s a Palace
plot to safeguard the peace. But Dorothy and her friends got in, and they saw him, and told everyone
what it was like!”
“Well well,” said the Witch. “Imagine that. All of Oz, Loyal and Otherwise, is yapping about
this Dorothy. What did the fools say next?”
“The dispatch soldier said that the guests asked the Wizard to grant them some wishes. The
Scarecrow asked for a brain, Nick Chopper the Tin Woodman asked for a heart, and the Cowardly
lion asked for courage.”
“And I suppose Dorothy asked for a shoe horn?”
“Dorothy asked to be sent home.”
“I hope she gets her wish. And?”
But Liir got coy.
“Oh come on, I’m too old to be put off my supper by gossip,” she snapped.
Liir looked flushed with guilty pleasure. “The soldiers said that the Wizard had rejected the
odd requests.”
“And you’re so very surprised?”
“The Wizard told Dorothy that he would grant them their wishes-when they had-when they
had-“
“You haven’t stuttered in years. Don’t start again, or I’ll beat you.”
“Dorothy and his friends have to come here and kill you,” he finished. “The soldiers said it’s
because you murdered an old lady in Shiz, a famous old lady, and you’re an assassin. Also you’re
crazy, they said.”
“I’m a more likely murderer than those incompetent vagabonds could be,” she said. “He was
just trying to get rid of them. Probably he’s instructed his own Gale Forcers to slit the girl’s throat as
soon as she’s safely out of the limelight.” And no doubt the Wizard had confiscated the shoes. It
galled her. But how flattered she felt that the news of her attack had gotten out. By now she was sure
she had killed Madame Morrible. It only made sense that she had.
But Liir shook his head. “The funny thing,” he said, “is that Dorothy is called Dorothy Gale.

The soldiers at Red Windmill said the Gale Forcers wouldn’t touch her, they’re too superstitious.”
“What do these soldiers know of intrigue, stationed here out at the edge of the moon?”
Liir shrugged. “Aren’t you impressed that the Wizard of Oz even knows who you are? Are you
a murderer?”
“Oh Liir, you’ll understand when you’re older. Or anyway not understanding will become
second nature, and it won’t matter. I wouldn’t harm you, if that’s what you mean. But you sound so
surprised that I should be known in the Emerald City. Just because you disobey me and treat me like
refuse, do you think the whole world does?” Yet she was pleased. “But you know, Liir, if there’s
even the slightest chance that there’s any truth to these rumors, you had better stay away from Red
Windmill for a while. They might kidnap you and hold you for ransom until I give myself up to this
schoolgirl and her needy companions.”
“I want to meet Dorothy,” he said.
“You’re not that age already, please preserve us,” she said. “I always intended to pickle you
before you got to puberty.”
“Well, I’m not getting kidnapped, so don’t worry,” he said. “Besides, I want to be here when
they get here.”
“Worry is the last thing I’d do if you got kidnapped,” she answered. “It’d be your own damn
fault, and a great relief to me to have one less mouth to feed.”
“Oh well, then who’d carry the firewood up all those stairs every winter?”
“I’ll hire that Nick Chopper fellow. His axe looks pretty sharp to me.”
“You’ve seen him?” Liir’s mouth dropped open. “No, you haven’t!”
“I have, as a matter of fact,” she said. “Who says I don’t travel in the best circles?”
“What’s she like?” he said, his face eager and bright. “You must have seen Dorothy too. What’s
she like, Auntie Witch?”
“Don’t you Auntie me, you know that makes me sick.”
He pestered without stopping until finally she had to screech at him. “She’s a beautiful little
dolt who believes everything everybody says to her! And if she gets here and you tell her you love
her, she’ll probably believe you! Now get out of here, I have work to do!”
He lingered at the door, and said, “The lion wants courage, the Tin
Man a heart, and the Scarecrow brains. Dorothy wants to go home. What do you want?”
“A little peace and quiet.”
“No, really.”
She couldn’t say forgiveness, not to Liir. She started to say “a soldier,” to make fun of his
mooning affections over the guys in uniform. But realizing even as she said it that he would be hurt,
she caught herself halfway, and in the end what came out of her mouth surprised them both. She said,
“A soul-“
He blinked at her.
“And you?” she said in a quieter voice. “What do you want Liir, if the Wizard could give you
anything?”
“A father,” he answered.
She wondered, briefly, if she was going insane. That night she sat up in a chair and thought
about what she had said.
A person who doesn’t believe in the Unnamed God, or anything else, can’t believe in a soul.
If you could take the skewers of religion, those that riddle your frame, make you aware every
time you move-if you could withdraw the scimitars of religion from your mental and moral systemscould you even stand? Or do you need religion as, say, the hippos in the Grasslands need the
poisonous little parasites within them, to help them digest fiber and pulp? The history of peoples

who have shucked off religion isn’t an especially persuasive argument for living without it. Is
religion itself- that tired and ironic phrase-the necessary evil?
The idea of religion worked for Nessarose, it worked for Frex. There may be no real city in the
clouds, but dreaming of it can enliven the spirit.
Perhaps in our age’s generous attempt at unionism, allowing all devotional urges life and breath
under the canopy of the Unnamed God, perhaps we have sealed our own doom. Perhaps it’s time to
name the Unnamed God, even feebly and in our own wicked image, that we may at least survive
under the illusion of an authority that could care for us.
For whittle away from the Unnamed God anything approximating
character, and what have you got? A big hollow wind. And wind may have gale force but it may
not have moral force; and a voice in a whirl’ wind is a carnival barker’s trick.
More appealing-she now saw, for once-the old-timers’ notions of paganism. Lurlina in her fairy
chariot, hovering just out of sight in the clouds, ready to swoop down some millennium or other and
remember who we are. The Unnamed God, by virtue of its anonymity, can’t ever be suspected of a
surprise visit.
And would we recognize the Unnamed God if it knocked on our doors?
Sometimes she napped, against her will, her chin sagging on her chest, sometimes driving right
down to the tabletop, jarring her teeth and
rattling her jaw, and startling herself awake.
She had taken to standing at the window, looking down in the valley. It would be weeks before
Dorothy and her band arrived, if indeed they hadn’t already been murdered and their corpses burned,
just as Sarima’s must have been.
One night LIir came back from a visit to the barracks. He was teary and inarticulate, and she
tried not to care about it, but was too curious to let it go. Finally he told her. One of the soldiers had
proposed to his fellows that when Dorothy and friends arrive, the friends be killed and Dorothy be
tied up for a little amusement among the lonely, randy men.
“Oh, men will have their fantasies,” said the Witch, but she was troubled.
What had made Liir cry was that his friends had reported the soldier’s remarks to their
superior. The soldier had been stripped and castrated, and nailed to the windmill. His body rotated
in circles as the vultures came and tried to peck at his entrails. He still wasn’t even dead.
“It isn’t hard to find evil in this world,” said the Witch. “Evil is always more easily imagined
than good, somehow.” But she was struck at the vehemence of the Commander’s response against
one of his own. So Dorothy might well be alive still, and was apparently under orders of protection
from the highest military offices in the land.
Liir held Chistery in his lap and sobbed onto his scalp. Chistery said, “Well, we’ll wail while
woe’ll wheel,” and he cried along with Liir.
“Aren’t they the sweet pair,” observed Nanny. “Wouldn’t that make the sweetest painting?”
Under cover of darkness the Witch slipped away on her broom, and saw to it that the suffering
soldier died at once.
She thought one afternoon, inexplicably, of the baby lion cub taken from its mother, and pressed
into service in Doctor Nikidik’s lab back in Shiz. She remembered how it had cowered, she
remembered the fuss she had made about it. Or was she only glorifying herself in hindsight?
If it was the same lion, grown up timid and unnatural, it should have no bone to pick with her.
She had saved it when it was young. Hadn’t she?
They confused her, this band of Yellow Brick Road Irregulars. The Tin Woodman was hollow,
a tiktok cipher, or an eviscerated human under a spell. The lion was a perversion of its own natural
instincts. She could deal with tiktok clockworks, she could handle Animals. But it was the

Scarecrow she feared. Was it a spell? Was it a mask? Was there merely some clever dancer inside?
All three of them were emasculated in some way or other, deluded under the spell of the girl’s
innocence.
She could give the Lion a history, and think of him as that abused cub in a ShIz science hall. She
suspected that Nick Chopper was the victim of her own sister’s spite and magic, casualty of the
enchanted axe. But she had no way to place the Scarecrow.
She began to think that behind that painted cornmeal sack of a face, there was a face she would
know, a face she had been waiting for.
She lit a candle and said the words aloud, as if she really could do spells. The words blew
aside the taper of grayish smoke that rose from the fatty tallow. If they had any other effect in the
world than that, she didn’t know it yet. “Fiyero didn’t die,” she said. “He was imprisoned, and he
has escaped. He is coming home to Kiamo Ko, he is coming home to me, and he is disguised as a
scarecrow because he doesn’t yet know what he will find.”
It would take brains to think up such a plan.
She took an old tunic of Fiyero’s. She called elderly Killyjoy and bade him sniff it well, and
sent him down into the valley every day, so
that if the travelers showed up, Killyjoy would be able to find them, and lead them home
rejoicing.
And though she tried not to sleep, on occasion she could not help it; her dreams brought Fiyero
closer and closer to home.
There was a day, in the first gusts of autumn, that the banners and standards of the camp below
were shifted and bugles blew tinnily up
the slopes to the castle. By this the Witch guessed that the troupe had arrived in Red Windmill,
and were being given a royal welcome. “They’ve come so far, they won’t wait now,” she said. “Go,
KiHyjoy, go find them and show them the quickest way here.”
She loosed the senior dog, and so strong were his exhortations that the entire pack of his kin
went racing along with him, howling with joy and frantic to do their duty.
“Nanny,” cried the Witch, “put on a clean petticoat and change your apron, we’ll have company
by nightfall!”
But the dogs didn’t come back, all afternoon and into the gloaming, and the Witch could see
why. With a telescopic eye in a cylindrical casing-invented by the Witch along the lines of Doctor
Dillamond’s discovery about opposing lenses-she followed a shock of carnage. Dorothy and the
Lion trembled with the Scarecrow beyond while the ‘Tin Woodman struck the heads of her beasts
one after the other with his axe. Killyjoy and his wolfy relations lay scattered like dead soldiers on a
field of retreat.
The Witch danced with rage, and summoned Liir. “Your dog is dead, look what they did!” she
cried. “Look and make sure that I didn’t only imagine it!”
“Well, I didn’t like that dog very much anymore,” said Liir. “He had a good long life, anyway.”
He concurred, tremblingly, but then trained the glass on the slope again.
“You fool, that Dorothy is not for messing with!” she cried, slapping the instrument out of his
hand.
“You’re awfully on edge for someone about to have company,” he said sullenly.
“They are supposed to be coming to kill me, if you remember,” she said, although she had
forgotten that, as she had forgotten her desire for the shoes until she saw them again in the glass. The
Wizard had not demanded them of Dorothy! Why not? What fresh campaign of intrigue was this?
She wheeled about her room, whipping pages of the Grimmerie back and forth. She recited a
spell, did it wrong, did it again, and then turned and tried to apply it to the crows. Though the

original three crows had long since fallen stiffly from the top of the door frame, there were plenty of
others in residence still, rather inbred and silly, but suggestible in a stupid, moblike way.
“Go,” she said. “Look with your eyes more closely than I can, pull the mask off the Scarecrow
so we can know who he is. Get them for me. Peck out the eyes of Dorothy and the Lion. And three of
you, go on ahead to the old Princess Nastoya, out there in the Thousand Year Grasslands, for the time
is coming when we will be reunited, all of us. With the help of the Grimmerie, the Wizard may
topple at last!”
“I never know what you’re talking about anymore,” said Liir. “You can’t blind them!”
“Oh, watch me,” snarled the Witch. The crows blew away in a black cloud and dropped like
buckshot through the sky, down the jagged precipices, until they came to the travelers.
“A pretty sunset, is there?” said Nanny, coming up to the Witch’s room in one of her rare
forays, Chistery as always providing service.
“She’s sent the crows out to blind the guests coming for dinner!”
“What?”
“She’s BLINDING THE GUESTS COMING FOR DINNER!”
“Well, that’s one way to avoid having to dust, I suppose.”
“Will you lunatics hush up?” The Witch was twitching as if with a nervous disorder; her
elbows flapped, as if she were a crow herself. She gave out a long howl when she found them in the
glass.
“What, what, let me see,” said Liir, grabbing the thing. He explained to Nanny, because the
Witch was almost beyond speech by now. “Well, I guess the Scarecrow knows how to scare crows,
all right.”
“Why, what’s he done?”
“They’re not coming back, that’s all I’ll say,” said Liir, glancing at the Witch.
“It still could be him,” she said at last, breathing heavily. “You might get your wish yet, Liir.”
“My wish?” He didn’t remember asking for a father, and she didn’t bother to remind him.
Nothing had yet suggested to her that the Scarecrow wasn’t a man in disguise. She would not need
forgiveness if Fiyero had not died!
The light was failing, and the odd band of friends was making good time up the hill. They had
come without an escort of soldiers, perhaps because the soldiers really believed that Kiamo Ko was
run by a Wicked Witch.
“Come on, bees,” said the Witch, “work with me now. All together on this one, honeys. We
need a little sting, we need a little zip, we want a little nasty, can you give us a little jab? No, not us,
listen when I talk to you, you simpletons! The girl on the hill below. She’s after your Queen Bee!
And when you’re through with your job, I’ll go down and collect those shoes.”
“What’s that old hag blathering about now?” said Nanny to Liir.
The bees were alert to the pitch in the Witch’s voice, and they rose to swarm out the window.
“You watch, I can’t look,” said the Witch.
“The moon is just like a pretty peach rising over the mountains,” said Nanny with the telescope
to her old cataracted eye. “Why don’t we put in some peach trees instead of all those infernal apples
in the back?”
“The bees, Nanny. Liir, take that from her and tell me what happens.”
Liir gave a blow-by-blow recounting. “They’re swooping down, they look like a genie or
something, all flying in a big clump with a straggly tail. The travelers see them coming. Yes! Yes!
The Scarecrow is taking straw out of his chest and leggings, and covering the Lion and Dorothy, and
there’s a little dog, too. So the bees can’t get through the straw, and the Scarecrow is all in pieces on
the ground.”

It couldn’t be. The Witch grabbed the eyepiece. “Liir, you are a filthy liar,” she shouted. Her
heart roared like a wind.
But it was true. There was nothing but straw and air inside the Scarecrow’s clothes. No hidden
lover returning, no last hope of salvation.
And the bees, having none left to attack but the TIn Woodman, flung themselves against him, and
dropped in black heaps on the ground,
like charred shadows, their stingers blunted on his fenders.
“You’ve got to give our guests credit for ingenuity,” said Liir.
“Will you shut up before I tie your tongue in a knot?” said the Witch.
“I suppose I should start down and get some hors d’oeuvres going, they’ll be peckish after these
ordeals you’re setting them,” said Nanny. “Have you an opinion as to cheese and crackers or fresh
vegetables with pepper sauce?”
“I say cheese,” said Liir.
“Elphaba? What’s your opinion?”
But she was too busy doing research in the Grimmerie. “It’s up to me, as always was the case,”
said Nanny. “I get to do all the work. I’m supposed to be teary with joy, at my age. You’d think I
could rest my feet for once, but no. Always the bridesmaid, never the bride.”
“Always the godfather, never the god,” said Liir.
“Will you two please have mercy on me! Now go on, Nanny, if you’re going!” Nanny headed
out the door as fast as her old limbs could take her. The Witch said, “Chistery, let her go under her
own steam, I need you here.”
“Sure, let me tumble to my death, delighted to be of service,” said Nanny. “It’s going to be
cheese, for that.”
The Witch explained to Chistery what she wanted. “This is foolish. It’ll be dark before long,
and they’ll tumble over some cliff and die. The poor dears, I’d rather not. I mean the Tin Woodman
and the Scarecrow, they can tumble all they want, and not be much hurt, I imagine. A good tinsmith
could repair a battered torso. But bring me Dorothy and the Lion. Dorothy has my shoes, and I have a
rendezvous with the Lion. We’re old friends. Can you do this?”
Chistery squinted, nodded, shook his head, shrugged, spat.
“Well try, what good are you if you don’t try,” she said. “Off with you, and your cronies with
you.”
She turned to Liir. “There, are you satisfied? I haven’t asked them to be killed. They’re being
escorted here as our guests. I’ll get the shoes and let them go on their way. And then I’ll walk this
Grimmerie into the mountains and live in a cave. You’re old enough to take care of yourself. Good
riddance to bad rubbish. Who needs forgiveness now? Well?”
“They’re coming to kill you,” he said.
“Yes, and aren’t you just breathless with anticipation for that!”
“I’ll protect you,” he said, uneasily, and then added, “but not to the extent of harming Dorothy.”
“Oh, go set the table, and tell Nanny to forget the cheese and crackers, and go with the
vegetables.” She shook her broom at him. “Go, I tell you, when I tell you to go!”
When she was alone, she sank in a heap. Either phenomenal luck lay with these travelers, or
they had enough courage, brains, and heart among them to do quite well. She was taking the wrong
approach, clearly. She should welcome the child, explain the situation nicely, and get the damned
shoes while she could. With the shoes, with the help of the Princess Nastoya, maybe there would be
vengeance against the Wizard yet. Anyway, the Grimmerie would be hidden. One way or the other.
And the shoes removed outside the Wizard’s reach.
But the shock of the death of her familiars made her blood run cold inside her. She could feel

her thoughts and intentions tumbling over and over one another. And she wasn’t really sure what she
would do when face-to-face with Dorothy.
Lohr and Nanny stood on either side of the doorway, smiling, when Chistery and his
companions came down with an ill-judged whump, dumping their passengers onto the cobbles of the
inner courtyard. The Lion moaned in pain and wept from vertigo. Dorothy sat up, clutching the small
dog in her arms, and said, “And where might we be now?”
“Welcome,” said Nanny, genuflecting.
“Hello,” said Liir, twisting one foot around the other and falling over into a bucket of water.
“You must be tired after your long trip,” said Nanny. “Would you like to freshen up some
before we have a little light meal? Nothing fancy, you know, we’re way ofT the beaten track.”
“This is Kiamo Ko,” said Liir, beet red and standing up again. “The stronghold of the Arjiki
tribe.”
“This is still Winkie territory?” said the girl anxiously.
“What’d she say, the little poppins, tell her to speak up,” said Nanny.
“It’s called the Vinkus,” said Liir. “Vt/inkie is a kind of insult.”
“Oh goodness, I wouldn’t want to offend anyone!” she said. “Mercy, no.”
“Aren’t you a pretty little girl, all your arms and legs in the right place, and such delicate
sensible inoffensive skin,” said Nanny, smiling.
“I’m Liir,” he said, “and I live here. This is my castle.”
“I’m Dorothy,” she said, “and I’m very worried about my friends- the Tin Woodman and the
Scarecrow. Oh, please, can’t somebody do something for them? It’s dark, and they’ll be lost!”
“They can’t be hurt. I’ll go get them tomorrow in the daylight,” said Liir. “Promise. I’d do
anything. Really, anything.”
“You’re so sweet, just like everyone else here,” said Dorothy. “Oh, Lion, are you all right?
Was it terrible?”
“If the Unnamed God had wanted Lions to fly, he’d have given them hot-air balloons,” said the
Lion. “I’m afraid I lost my lunch somewhere over the ravine.”
“Warm welcomes,” Nanny chirped. “We’ve been expecting you. I’ve worn my fingers to the
bone, making a little something. It’s not much, but everything we have is yours. That’s our motto here
in the mountains. The traveler is always welcome. Now let’s go find some hot water and soap at the
pump, shall we, and then go in.”
“You’re too kind-but I need to find the Wicked Witch of the
West,” Dorothy said. “I said THE WICKED WiTCH OF THE WEST.
I’m so sorry to trouble you. And it looks like a perfectly wonderful castle.
Perhaps on the way back, if my travels take me this way.”
“Oh, well, she lives here, too,” said hr. “With me. Don’t worry, she’s here.”
Dorothy looked a little pale. “She is?”
The Witch appeared at the doorway. “She is indeed, and here she is,” she said, and came down
the steps at a clip, her skirts whirling, her broom hurrying to keep up. “Well, Chistery, you did good
work! I’m glad to see all my efforts haven’t been for naught. You, Dorothy, Dorothy Gale, the one
whose house had the nerve to make a crash landing on my sister!”
“Well, it wasn’t my house, in a legal sense, strictly speaking,” said
Dorothy, “and in fact it hardly belonged much to Auntie Em and Uncle Henry, except for maybe
a couple of windows and the chimney. I mean the Mechanics and Farmers First State Bank of
Wichita holds the mortgage, so they’re the responsible parties. I mean if you need to be in touch with
someone. They’re the bank that cares,” she explained.
The Witch felt suddenly, oddly calm. “It’s nothing to me who owns the house,” she said. “The

fact is that my sister was alive before you arrived, and now she’s dead.”
“Oh, and I’m so very sorry about that,” said Dorothy nervously. “Really I am. I’d have done
anything to avoid it. I know how terrible I’d feel if a house fell on Auntie Em. Once a board in the
porch roof fell on her. She had a big bump on her head and sang hymns all afternoon, but by evening
she was her old cranky self.”
Dorothy tucked her little dog under her arm and went up and took the Witch’s hands in hers.
“Real!y I’m sorry,” she insisted. “It’s a terrible thing to lose someone. I lost my parents when I was
small, and I remember.”
“Get off me,” said the Witch, “I hate false sentiment. It makes my skin crawl.”
But the girl held on, with a ragged sort of intensity, and said nothing, just waited.
“Let go, let go,” said the Witch.
“Were you close to your sister?” asked Dorothy.
“That’s not the point,” she snapped.
“Because I was very close to my Mama, and when she and Papa were lost at sea, I could hardly
bear it.”
“Lost at sea, how do you mean,” said the Witch, detaching herself from the clinging child.
“They were on their way to visit my grandmama in the old country, because she was dying, and
a storm came up and their ship went over and broke in half and sank to the bottom of the sea. And
they drowned, every soul onboard.”
“Oh, so they had souls,” said the Witch, her mind recoiling at the image of a ship in all that
water.
“And still do. That’s all they have left, I suspect.”
“Please will you not cling so. And come in for something to eat.”
“Come on, you too,” said the girl to the Lion, and it sulkily rolled onto its big padded paws and
followed along.
So now we turn into a restaurant, thought the Witch darkly. What, shall I send a flying monkey
down to Red Windmill to engage a violinist, for mood music? What a most peculiar murderer she is
turning out to be.
The Witch began to think about how she might disarm the girl. It was hard to tell what her
weapons were, except for that sort of inane good sense and emotional honesty.
During dinner Dorothy began to cry.
“What, she would have preferred the vegetables to the cheese?” said Nanny.
But the girl would not answer. She set both her hands on the scrubbed oaken tabletop, and her
shoulders shook with grief. Liir longed to get up and wrap his arms around her. The Witch nodded
grimly that he was to stay put. He whacked his milk mug hard on the table, in annoyance.
“It’s all very nice,” Dorothy said at last, sniffling,” but I am so worried for Uncle Henry and
Auntie Em. Uncle Henry frets so when I’m just a wee bit late from the schoolhouse, and Auntie Emwell, she can be so cross when she’s upset!”
“All Aunties are cross,” said Liir.
“Eat up, for who knows when another meal will come your way,” said the Witch.
The girl tried to eat, but kept dissolving in tears. Eventually Liir began to tear up, too. The little
dog, Toto, begged for scraps, which made the Witch think of her own losses. Killyjoy, who had been
with her eight years, a fly-ridden corpse going stiff on the hill among all his progeny. She cared less
about the bees and the crows, but Killyjoy was her special pet.
“Well, this is some party,” said Nanny. “I wonder if I should have prettied things up with a
candle.”
“Kindle candle can dull,” said Chistery.

Nanny lit a candle and sang “Happy Birthday to You,” to make Dorothy feel better, but no one
joined in.
Then silence fell. Only Nanny kept eating, finishing the cheese and starting on the candle. Liir
was turning white and pink by turns, and Dorothy had begun to stare blankly at a knothole in the
polished wood of the trestle table. The Witch scratched her fingers with her knife, and ran
the blade along her forefinger softly, as if it were the feather of a pfenix.
“What’s going to happen to me,” said Dorothy, lapsing into a monotone. “I shouldn’t have come
here.”
“Nanny, Liir,” said the Witch, “take yourselves off to the kitchen. Bring the Lion with you.”
“Is that old bag talking to me?” Nanny asked Liir. “Why’s the little girl crying, our food not
good enough for her?”
“I’m not leaving Dorothy’s side!” said the Lion.
“Don’t I know you?” said the Witch in a low, even voice. “You were the cub they did
experiments with in the science lab at Shin long ago. You were terrified then and I spoke up for you.
I’ll save you again if you behave.”
“I don’t want to be saved,” said the Lion petulantly.
“I know the feeling,” said the Witch. “But you can teach me something about Animals in the
wild. Whether they revert, or how much. I take it you were raised in the wild. You can be of service.
You can protect me when I go out of here with my Grimmerie, my book of magicks, my Malleus
Maleficarum, my mesmerizing incunabulum, my codex of scarabee, fylfot and gammadion, my text
thaumaturgical.”
The Lion roared, so suddenly they were all jolted in their seats, even Dorothy. “Thunder at
night, devil’s delight,” observed Nanny, glancing out the window. “I better take in the laundry.”
“I’m bigger than you,” said the Lion to the Witch, “and I’m not letting Dorothy alone with you.”
The Witch swooped down and gathered the little dog in her arms. “Chistery, go dump this thing
in the fishwell,” she said. Chistery looked dubious, but scampered away with Toto under his arm
like a yapping furry loaf of bread.
“Oh no, save him, someone!” said Dorothy. The Witch shot out her hand and pinned her to the
table, but the lion had catapulted into the kitchen after the snow monkey and Toto.
“Liir, lock the kitchen door,” shouted the Witch. “Bar it so they can’t come back.”
“No, no,” cried Dorothy, “I’ll go with you, just don’t hurt Toto! He’s done nothing to you!” She
turned to Liir, and said, “Please don’t let that monkey hurt my Toto. The Lion is useless, don’t trust
him to save my little dog!”
“Do I take it we’ll have pudding by the fire?” said Nanny, looking up brightly. “It’s caramel
custard.”
The Witch took Dorothy’s hand and began to lead her away. Liir suddenly leaped over and took
hold of Dorothy’s other hand. “You old hag, let her alone,” he shouted.
“liir, really, you pick the most awkward times to develop character,” said the Witch wearily,
quietly. “Don’t embarrass yourself and me with this charade of courage.”
“I’ll be all right-just take care of Toto,” said Dorothy. “Oh Liir, take care of Toto, no matter
what-please. He needs a home.”
Liir leaned over and kissed Dorothy, who fell against the wall in astonishment.
“Release me,” mumbled the Witch. “Whatever my faults, I don’t deserve this.”
She pushed Dorothy ahead of her into the tower room, and locked the door behind her. The long
period of sleeplessness was making her head spin. “What have you come for,” she said to the girl. “I
know why you have tramped all the way from the Emerald City-but go on, tell me to my face! Have
you come to murder me, as the rumors say-or do you carry a message from the Wizard, maybe? Is he

now willing to bargain the book for Nor? The magic for the child? Tell me! Or-I know-he has
instructed you to steal my book! Is it that!”
But the girl only backed away, looking left and right, for an escape. There was no way out
except the window, and that was a deadly fall.
“Tell me,” said the Witch.
“I am all alone in a strange land, don’t make me do this,” said the girl.
“You came to kill me and then to steal the Grimmerie!”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about!”
“First give me the shoes,” said the Witch, “for they’re mine. Then we’ll talk.”
“I can’t, they won’t come off,” said the girl, “I think that Glinda put a spell on them. I’ve been
trying to get them off for days. My socks are so sweaty, it’s not to be believed.”
“Give them me!” snarled the Witch. “If you go back to the Wizard with them, you’ll be playing
right into his hands!”
“No, look, they’re stuck!” shouted the girl. She kicked at one heel with the other toe. “Look,
see, I’m trying, I’m trying, they won’t come off, honest, promise! I tried to give them to the Wizard
when he demanded them, but they wouldn’t come off! There’s something the matter with them,
they’re too tight or something! Or maybe I’m growing.”
“You have no right to those shoes,” said the Witch. She circled. The girl backed away,
stumbling over furniture, knocking over the beehive, and stepping on the queen bee, who had
emerged from the fragments.
“Everything I have, every little thing I have, dies when you come across it,” said the Witch.
“There’s Liir down below, ready to throw me over for the sake of a single kiss. My beasts are dead,
my sister is dead, you strew death in your path, and you’re just a girl! You remind me of Nor! She
thought the world was magic, and look what happened to her!”
“What, what happened?” said Dorothy, pitiably playing for time.
“She found out just how magic it was, she was kidnapped, and lives her miserable life as a
political prisoner!”
“But so have you kidnapped me, and I asked for none of it, nothing. You must have mercy.”
The Witch came near and grabbed the girl by the wrist. “Why do you want to murder me,” she
said. “Can you really believe the Wizard will do as he says? He doesn’t know what truth means, so
he does not even know how he lies! And I did not kidnap you, you fool! You came here of your own
accord, to murder me!”
“I didn’t come to murder anyone,” said the girl, shrinking back.
“Are you the Adept?” said the Witch suddenly. “Aha! Are you the Third Adept? Is that it?
Nessarose, Glinda and you? Did Madame Morrible conscript you for service to the hidden power?
You work in collusion: my sister’s shoes, my friend’s charm, and your innocent strength. Admit it,
admit you’re the Adept! Admit it!”
“I’m not adept, I’m adopted,” said the girl. “I’m sure not adept at anything, can’t you tell that?”
“You’re my soul come scavenging for me, I can feel it,” said the Witch. “I won’t have it, I
won’t have it. I won’t have a soul; with a soul there is everlastingness, and life has tortured me
enough.”
The Witch pulled Dorothy back to the corridor, and stuck the end of her broom in a torch fire.
Nanny was hobbling up the stairs leaning on Chistery, who had some dishes of pudding on a tray. “I
locked the whole lot of them in the kitchen until they stop their roughhousing,” Nanny was muttering.
“Such a hubbub, such a racket, such a wild rumpus, Nanny won’t have it, Nanny is too old. They’re
all beasts.”
Below, in the dusty recesses of Kiamo Ko, the dog barked once or twice, the lion roared and

pounded against the kitchen door, and hr shrieked, “Dorothy, we’re coming!” But the Witch turned
and shot out her foot, and toppled Nanny over. The old woman rolled and slid, oohing and woohing,
down the stairs, Chistery chasing after her in consternation. The kitchen door had burst its hinges,
and the lion and Liir came tumbling out, falling over the big heap of Nanny at the foot of the stairs.
“Up, you, up,” shouted the Witch, “I’ll have done with you before you have done with me!”
Dorothy had wrenched herself free and dashed up the corkscrew stairs of the tower ahead of the
Witch. There was only one exit, and that was to the parapet. The Witch followed in good speed,
needing to finish the deed before the Lion and Liir arrived. She would get the shoes, she would take
the Grimmerie, she would abandon Liir and Nor, and disappear into the wilderness. She would burn
the book and the shoes, and then she would bury herself.
Dorothy was a dark shape, huddled over, retching on the stones.
“You haven’t answered my question,” said the Witch, poking the torch up high, releasing
spectres and ghosts among the shadows of the castellations. “You’ve come hunting me down, and I
want to know. Why will you murder me?”
The Witch slammed the door behind her and locked it. All the better.
The girl could only gasp.
“You think they’re not telling stories about you all over Oz? You think I don’t know the Wizard
sent you here to bring back proof that I was dead?”
“Oh, that,” said Dorothy, “that is true, but that’s not why I came!”
“You can’t possibly be a competent liar, not with that face!” The Witch held the broom up at an
angle. “Tell me the truth, and when you’ve finished, then I’ll kill you, for in times like these, my little
one, you must kill before you are killed.”
“I couldn’t kill you,” said the girl, weeping. “I was horror-struck to have killed your sister.
How could I kill you too?”
“Very charming,” said the Witch, “very nice, very touching. Then why did you come here?”
“Yes, the Wizard said to murder you,” Dorothy said, “but I never intended to, and that’s not
why I came!”
The Witch held the burning broom even higher, closer, to look in the girl’s face.
“When they said … when they said that it was your sister, and that we had to come here . . . it
was like a prison sentence, and I never wanted to - - . but I thought, well, I would come, and my
friends would come with me to help. . . and I would come.. . and I would say..
“Say what,” cried the Witch, on the edge.
“I would say,” said the girl, straightening up, gritting her teeth, “I would say to you: Would you
ever forgive me for that accident, for the death of your sister; would you ever ever forgive me, for I
could never forgive myself!”
The Witch shrieked, in panic, in disbelief. That even now the world should twist so, offending
her once again: Elphaba, who had endured Sarima’s refusal to forgive, now begged by a gibbering
child for the same mercy always denied her? How could you give such a thing out of your own
hollowness?
She was caught, twisting, trying, full of will, but toward what? A fragment of the brush of the
broom fluttered off, and lit on her skirt, and there was a run of flames in her lap, eating up the dryest
tinder in the Vinkus. “Oh, will this nightmare never end,” screamed Dorothy, and she grabbed at a
bucket for collecting rainwater that, in the sudden fare-up of light, had come into view. She said, “I
will save you!” and she hurled the water at the Witch.
An instant of sharp pain before the numbness. The world was floods above and fire below. If
there was such a thing as a soul, the soul had gambled on a sort of baptism, and had it won?
The body apologizes to the soul for its errors, and the soul asks forgiveness for squatting in the

body without invitation.
A ring of expectant faces before the light dims; they move in the
shadows like ghouls. There is Mama, playing with her hair; there is Nessarose, stern and
bleached as weathered timber. There is Papa, lost in his reflections, looking for himself in the faces
of the suspicious heathen. There is Shell, not quite yet himself despite his apparent wholeness.
They become others; they become Nanny in her prime, tart and officious; and Ama Clutch and
Ama Vimp and the other Amas, lumped together now in a maternal blur. They become Boq, sweet
and lithe and earnest, as yet unbowed; and Crope and Tibbett in their funny, campy anxiety to be
liked; and Avaric in his superiority. And Glinda in her gowns, waiting to be good enough to deserve
what she gets.
And the ones whose stories are over: Manek and Madame Morrible and Doctor Dillamond and
most of all Fiyero, whose blue diamonds are the blues of water and of sulfurous fire both. And the
ones whose stories are curiously unfinished-was it to be like this?-the Princess Nastoya of the
Scrow, whose help could not arrive in time; and Liir, the mysterious foundling boy, pushing out of
his pea pod. Sarima, who in her loving welcome and sisterliness would not forgive, and Sarima’s
sisters and children and future and past…
And the ones who fell to the Wizard, including Killyjoy and the other resident creatures; and
behind them the Wizard himself, a failure until he exiled himself from his own land; and behind him
Yackle, whoever she was, if anyone, and the anonymous Adepts, if they existed, and the dwarf, who
had no name to share.
And the creatures of makeshift lives, the hobbled together, the disenfranchised, and the abused:
the Lion, the Scarecrow, the maimed Tin Woodman. Up from the shadows for an instant, up into the
light; then back.
The Goddess of Gifts the last, reaching in among flames and water, cradling her, crooning
something, but the words remain unclear.
Oz stretched out from Kiamo Ko a good several hundred miles to the west and north, and even
farther to the east and south. On the night the Wicked Witch of the West died, anyone with the eyes to
see so well could have looked out from the parapet. Westward, the moon was rising
over the Thousand Year Grasslands. Though the peaceful Yunamata refused to join them, the
Aijiki clans and the Scrow were meeting to consider a pact of alliance, given the Wizard’s armies
massing up in Kumbricia’s Pass. The Arjiki chieftain and the Princess Nastoya agreed to send a
delegation to the Witch of the West, and ask for guidance and support. As they toasted her and
wished her well, not an hour after her death, the messenger crows Elphaba had dispatched for help
were swooped upon by nocturnal rocs and devoured.
The moon ran silver up and down the sides of the Great Kells, and silver shadows settled in the
valleys of the Lesser Kells. The scorpions of the Sour Sands came out to sting, the skark of the
Thursk Desert mated in their nests. At the Kvon Altar practitioners of a sect so obscure that it had no
name made their nightly oblations for the souls of the dead, assuming, as most do, that the dead had
had souls.
The Quadling Country, a wasteland of mud and frogs, rotted quietly all night, except for an
incident in Qhoyre. A Crocodile entered a nursery and chewed up a small baby. The Animal was
destroyed, and both corpses were burned, with loud wailing and anger.
In Gilhikin, the banks turned over their money to keep it fresh and vibrant, the factories turned
over their wares, the merchants turned over their wives, the students in Shiz turned over intellectual
propositions, and the tiktok labor force met secretly, in what had used to be the Philosophy Club, to
hear the freed and grieving Grommetik talk class revolution. Lady Glinda had a bad night, a night of
shakes and regret and pain; she guessed it was the early signs of gout from her rich diet. But she sat

up half the night and lit a candle in a window, for reasons she couldn’t articulate. The moon passed
overhead in its path from the Vinkus, and she felt its accusatory spotlight, and moved back from the
tall windows.
Across the low ridge of hills known as the Madeleines, into the Corn Basket, looking into the
windows of Colwen Grounds, the moon continued its journey. Frex was asleep, dreaming of Turtle
Heart and yes, of Melena, his beautiful Melena, making him breakfast on the day he went in to preach
against the evil clock. Melena was a froth of beauty, huge as a world, spinning him courage, daring,
love. Frex hardly stirred when Shell tiptoed in, back from some clandestine rendezvous, and came to
sit by the side of his bed. Shell wasn’t sure he noticed, he wasn’t sure
his father really woke up. “What I never could understand was the teeth,” mumbled Frex, “why
the teeth?”
“Who knows why?” said Shell fondly, not understanding the dreamy murmur.
The moon on the Emerald City? It couldn’t be seen; lights too bright, energy too high, spirits too
wired. No one looked for it. In a room, surprisingly bare and simple for one so powerful and
elevated, the sleepless Wizard of Oz wiped his brow, and wondered how long his luck would hold
out. He had been wondering the same thing for forty years, and he had hoped that luck would begin to
seem habitual, deserved. But he could hear the very mice chewing away at the foundations of his
Palace. The arrival of that Dorothy Gale, from Kansas, was a summons, he knew it; he knew it when
he saw her face. There was no point in searching after the Grimmerie any longer. His avenging angel
had come to call him home. A suicide was waiting for him back in his own world, and by now he
ought to have learned enough to get through it successfully.
He had sent Dorothy, locked in those shoes as she was, to kill the Witch. He had sent a girl in to
do a man’s job. If the Witch was the victor-well, that was the troublesome girl out of the way, then.
Perversely, though, in a fatherly way, he half hoped Dorothy would get through her trials all right.
It became a celebrated event, the death of the Wicked Witch of the West. It was hailed as
political assassination or a juicy murder. Dorothy’s description of what had happened was deemed
self-delusion, at best, or a bald-faced lie. Murder or mercy killing or accident, in an indirect way it
helped rid the country of its dictator.
Dorothy, more stunned than ever, made her way back to the Emerald City with the Lion, the Tin
Woodman, the Scarecrow, and Liir. There Dorothy had her second famous audience with the
Wizard. Perhaps he again tried to pry the slippers off her for his own purposes, and perhaps Dorothy
outwitted him, spurred by the Witch’s warnings. At any rate, she presented him with something from
the Witch’s house to prove that she had been there. The broom had been burnt beyond recognition,
and the Grimmerie had seemed too cumbersome to carry, so she brought the green glass bottle that
said MIRACLE EU- on the paper glued to the front.
It may merely be apocryphal that when the Wizard saw the glass bottle he gasped, and clutched
his heart. The story is told in so many ways, depending on who is doing the telling, and what needs
to be heard at the time. It is a matter of history, however, that shortly thereafter, the Wizard
absconded from the Palace. He left in the way he had first arrived-a hot-air balloon-just a few hours
before seditious ministers were to lead a Palace revolt and to hold an execution without trial.
A lot of nonsense has been circulated about how Dorothy left Oz. There are some who say that
she never did; they say as they said of Ozma before her that she is in hiding, in disguise, patient as a
maiden, waiting to come back and show herself again. Others insist she flew up into the sky like a
saint ascending to the Other Land, waving her apron giddily and clutching that damn fool dog.
Liir disappeared into the sea of humanity in the Emerald City, to hunt for his half-sister, Nor.
He was not heard of again for some time.
Whatever may have happened to the original shoes, everyone remembered them as beautiful,

even stunning. Well-fashioned name-brand imitations were always available and never went out of
style for very long. The shoes or their replicas, with their suggestion of residual magic, cropped up
at so many public ceremonies that, like the relics of saints, they began to multiply to fill the need.
And of the Witch? In the life of a Witch, there is no after, in the ever after of a Witch, there is no
hap pity; in the story of a Witch, there is no afterword. Of that part that is beyond the life story,
beyond the story of the life, there is-alas, or perhaps thank mercy-no telling. She was dead, dead and
gone, and all that was left of her was the carapace of her reputation for malice.
“And there the wicked old Witch stayed for a good long time.”
“And did she ever come out?”
“Not yet.”
The End

Table of Contents
Wicked - The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West
Book 1 - Munchkinlanders
Book 2 - Gillikin
Book 3 - City of Emeralds
Book 4 - In the Vinkus
Book 5 - The Murder and Its Afterlife

